Document Name: /part1/suspicious-document00427.txt
Atom_Type: paragraph
Cluster_Method: combine_confidences
Plagiarized Atoms Count: 792/792
Non-Plagiarized Atoms Count: 0/792

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NON-PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is an atom: 
ï»¿"This is what has come of sending you to see him! Of course I shall
tell my uncle everything."

This is an atom: 
"You will do no such thing. Arabella, do not make a fool of
yourself. Do you know what 8,000 pounds will do for you? It is to
be your own,--absolutely beyond my reach or your father's."

This is an atom: 
"I would sooner go into the Thames off Waterloo Bridge than touch a
farthing of his money," said Arabella with a spirit which the other
woman did not at all understand. Hitherto in all these little dirty
ways they had run with equal steps. The pretences, the subterfuges,
the lies of the one had always been open to the other. Arabella,
earnest in supplying herself with gloves from the pockets of her
male acquaintances, had endured her mother's tricks with
complacency. She had condescended when living in humble lodgings to
date her letters from a well-known hotel, and had not feared to
declare that she had done so in their family conversations.
Together they had fished in turbid waters for marital nibbles and
had told mutual falsehoods to unbelieving tradesmen. And yet the
younger woman, when tempted with a bribe worth lies and tricks as
deep and as black as Acheron, now stood on her dignity and her
purity and stamped her foot with honest indignation!

This is an atom: 
"I don't think you can understand it," said Lady Augustus.

This is an atom: 
"I can understand this,--that you have betrayed me; and that I
shall tell him so in the plainest words that I can use. To get his
lawyer to write and offer me money!"

This is an atom: 
"He should not have gone to his lawyer. I do think he was wrong
there."

This is an atom: 
"But you settled it with him; you, my mother;--a price at which he
should buy himself off! Would he have offered me money if he did
not know that he had bound himself to me?"

This is an atom: 
"Nothing on earth would make him marry you. I would not for a
moment have allowed him to allude to money if that had not been
quite certain."

This is an atom: 
"Who proposed the money first?"

This is an atom: 
Lady Augustus considered a moment before she answered. "Upon my
word, my dear, I can't say. He wrote the figures on a bit of paper;
that was the way." Then she produced the scrap. "He wrote the
figures first,--and then I altered them, just as you see. The
proposition came first from him, of course."

This is an atom: 
"And you did not spit at him!" She tore the scrap into fragments.

This is an atom: 
"Arabella," said the mother, "it is clear that you do not look into
the future. How do you mean to live? You are getting old."

This is an atom: 
"Old!"

This is an atom: 
"Yes, my love,--old. Of course I am willing to do everything for
you, as I always have done,--for so many years, but there isn't a
man in London who does not know how long you have been about it."

This is an atom: 
"Hold your tongue, mamma" said Arabella jumping up.

This is an atom: 
"That is all very well, but the truth has to be spoken. You and I
cannot go on as we have been doing."

This is an atom: 
"Certainly not. I would sooner be in a work-house."

This is an atom: 
"And here there is provided for you an income on which you can
live. Not a soul will know anything about it. Even your own father
need not be told. As for the lawyer, that is nothing. They never
talk of things. It would make a man comparatively poor quite a fit
match. Or, if you do not marry, it would enable you to live where
you pleased independently of me. You had better think twice of it
before you refuse it."

This is an atom: 
"I will not think of it at all. As sure as I am living here I will
write to Rufford this very evening and tell him in what light I
regard both him and you."

This is an atom: 
"And what will you do then?"

This is an atom: 
"Hang myself."

This is an atom: 
"That is all very well, Arabella, but hanging yourself and jumping
off Waterloo Bridge do not mean anything. You must live, and you
must pay your debts" I can't pay them for you. You go into your own
room, and think of it all, and be thankful for what Providence has
sent you."

This is an atom: 
"You may as well understand that I am in earnest," the daughter
said as she left the room. "I shall write to Lord Rufford to-day
and tell him what I think of him and his money. You need not
trouble yourself as to what shall be done with it; for I certainly
shall not take it."

This is an atom: 
And she did write to Lord Rufford as follows:

This is an atom: 
My Lord,

This is an atom: 
I have been much astonished by a letter I have received from a
gentleman in London, Mr. Shaw, who I presume is your lawyer. When I
received it I had not as yet seen mamma. I now understand that you
and she between you have determined that I should be compensated by
a sum of money for the injury you have done me! I scorn your money.
I cannot think where you found the audacity to make such a
proposal, or how you have taught yourself to imagine that I should
listen to it. As to mamma, she was not commissioned to act for me,
and I have nothing to do with anything she may have said. I can
hardly believe that she should have agreed to such a proposal. It
was very little like a gentleman in you to offer it.

This is an atom: 
Why did you offer it? You would not have proposed to give me a
large sum of money like that without some reason. I have been
shocked to hear that you have denied that you ever engaged yourself
to me. You know that you were engaged to me. It would have been
more honest and more manly if you had declared at once that you
repented of your engagement. But the truth is that till I see you
myself and hear what you have to say out of your own mouth I cannot
believe what other people tell me. I must ask you to name some
place where we can meet. As for this offer of money, it goes for
nothing. You must have known that I would not take it.
                                   Arabella.

This is an atom: 
It was now just the end of February, and the visit of the Trefoil
ladies to the Connop Greens had to come to an end. They had already
overstaid the time at first arranged, and Lady Augustus, when she
hinted that another week at Marygold,--"just till this painful
affair was finally settled,"--would be beneficial to her, was
informed that the Connop Greens themselves were about to leave
home. Lady Augustus had reported to Mrs. Connop Green that Lord
Rufford was behaving very badly, but that the matter was still in a
"transition state." Mrs. Connop Green was very sorry, but--. So
Lady Augustus and Arabella betook themselves to Orchard Street,
being at that moment unable to enter in upon better quarters.

This is an atom: 
What a home it was,--and what a journey up to town! Arabella had
told her mother that the letter to Lord Rufford had been written
and posted, and since that hardly a word had passed between them.
When they left Marygold in the Connop Green carriage they smiled,
and shook hands, and kissed their friends in unison, and then sank
back into silence. At the station they walked up and down the
platform together for the sake of appearance, but did not speak. In
the train there were others with them and they both feigned to be
asleep. Then they were driven to their lodgings in a cab, still
speechless. It was the mother who first saw that the horror of this
if continued would be too great to be endured. "Arabella," she said
in a hoarse voice, "why don't you speak?"

This is an atom: 
"Because I've got nothing to say."

This is an atom: 
"That's nonsense. There is always something to say."

This is an atom: 
"You have ruined me, mamma; just ruined me."

This is an atom: 
"I did for you the very best I could. If you would have been
advised by me, instead of being ruined, you would have had a
handsome fortune. I have slaved for you for the last twelve years.
No mother ever sacrificed herself for her child more than I have
done for you, and now see the return I get. I sometimes think that
it will kill me."

This is an atom: 
"That's nonsense."

This is an atom: 
"Everything I say is nonsense,--while you tell me one day that you
are going to hang yourself, and another day that you will drown
yourself."

This is an atom: 
"So I would if I dared. What is it that you have brought me to? Who
will have me in their houses when they hear that you consented to
take Lord Rufford's money?"

This is an atom: 
"Nobody will hear it unless you tell them."

This is an atom: 
"I shall tell my uncle and my aunt and Mistletoe, in order that
they may know how it is that Lord Rufford has been allowed to
escape. I say that you have ruined me. If it had not been for your
vulgar bargain with him, he must have been brought to keep his word
at last. Oh, that he should have ever thought it was possible that
I was to be bought off for a sum of money!"

This is an atom: 
Later on in the evening the mother again implored her daughter to
speak to her. "What's the use, mamma, when you know what we think
of each other. What's the good of pretending? There is nobody here
to hear us." Later on still she herself began. "I don't know how
much you've got, mamma; but whatever it is, we'd better divide it.
After what you did in Piccadilly we shall never get on together
again."

This is an atom: 
"There is not enough to divide," said Lady Augustus.

This is an atom: 
"If I had not you to go about with me I could get taken in pretty
nearly all the year round."

This is an atom: 
"Who'd take you?"

This is an atom: 
"Leave that to me. I would manage it, and you could join with some
other old person."

This is an atom: 
"We shall kill each other if we stay like this," said Arabella as
she took up her candle.

This is an atom: 
"You have pretty nearly killed me as it is," said the old woman as
the other shut the door.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER IX

This is an atom: 
Changes at Bragton

This is an atom: 
Day after day old Mrs. Morton urged her purpose with her grandson
at Bragton, not quite directly as she had done at first, but by
gradual approaches and little soft attempts made in the midst of
all the tenderness which, as a nurse, she was able to display. It
soon came to pass that the intruders were banished from the house,
or almost banished. Mary's daily visits were discontinued
immediately after that last walk home with Reginald Morton which
has been described. Twice in the course of the next week she went
over, but on both occasions she did so early in the day, and
returned alone just as he was reaching the house. And then, before
a week was over, early in March, Lady Ushant told the invalid that
she would be better away. "Mrs. Morton doesn't like me," she said,
"and I had better go. But I shall stay for a while at Hoppet Hall;
and come in and see you from time to time till you get better."
John Morton replied that he should never get better; but though he
said so then, there was at times evidence that he did not yet quite
despond as to himself. He could still talk to Mrs. Morton of buying
Chowton Farm, and was very anxious that he should not be forgotten
at the Foreign Office.

This is an atom: 
Lady Ushant had herself driven to Hoppet Hall, and there took up
her residence with her nephew. Every other day Mr. Runciman's fly
came for her and carried her backwards and forwards to Bragton. On
those occasions she would remain an hour with the invalid, and then
would go back again, never even seeing Mrs. Morton, though always
seen by her. And twice after this banishment Reginald walked over.
But on the second occasion there was a scene. Mrs. Morton to whom
he had never spoken since he was a boy, met him in the hall and
told him that his visits only disturbed his sick cousin. "I
certainly will not disturb him," Reginald had said. "In the
condition in which he is now he should not see many people,"
rejoined the lady. "If you will ask Dr. Fanning he will tell you
the same." Dr. Fanning was the London doctor who came down once a
week, whom it was improbable that Reginald should have an
opportunity of consulting. But he remembered or thought that he
remembered, that his cousin had been fretful and ill-pleased during
his last visit, and so turned himself round and went home without
another word.

This is an atom: 
"I am afraid there may be--I don't know what," said Lady Ushant to
him in a whisper the next morning.

This is an atom: 
"What do you mean?"

This is an atom: 
"I don't know what I mean. Perhaps I ought not to say a word. Only
so much does depend on it!"

This is an atom: 
"If you are thinking about the property, aunt, wipe it out of your
mind. Let him do what he pleases and don't think about it. No one
should trouble their minds about such things. It is his, to do what
he pleases with it."

This is an atom: 
"It is not him that I fear, Reginald."

This is an atom: 
"If he chooses to be guided by her, who shall say that he is wrong?
Get it out of your mind. The very thinking about such things is
dirtiness!" The poor old lady submitted to the rebuke and did not
dare to say another word.

This is an atom: 
Daily Lady Ushant would send over for Mary Masters, thinking it
cruel that her young friend should leave her alone and yet
understanding in part the reason why Mary did not come to her
constantly at Hoppet Hall. Poor Mary was troubled much by these
messages. Of course she went now and again. She had no alternative
but to go, and yet, feeling that the house was his house, she was
most unwilling to enter it. Then grew within her a feeling, which
she could not analyse, that he had ill-used her. Of course she was
not entitled to his love. She would acknowledge to herself over and
over again that he had never spoken a word to her which could
justify her in expecting his love. But why had he not let her
alone? Why had he striven by his words and his society to make her
other than she would have been had she been left to the atmosphere
of her stepmother's home? Why had he spoken so strongly to her as
to that young man's love? And then she was almost angry with him
because, by a turn in the wheel of fortune, he was about to become,
as she thought, Squire of Bragton. Had he remained simply Mr.
Morton of Hoppet Hall it would still have been impossible. But this
exaltation of her idol altogether out of her reach was an added
injustice. She could remember, not the person, but all the recent
memories of the old Squire, the veneration with which he was named,
the masterdom which was attributed to him, the unequalled nobility
of his position in regard to Dillsborough. His successor would be
to her as some one crowned, and removed by his crown altogether
from her world. Then she pictured to herself the stately dame who
would certainly come, and she made fresh resolutions with a sore
heart.

This is an atom: 
"I don't know why you should be so very little with me," said Lady
Ushant, almost whining. "When I was at Cheltenham you wanted to
come to me."

This is an atom: 
"There are so many things to be done at home."

This is an atom: 
"And yet you would have come to Cheltenham."

This is an atom: 
"We were in great trouble then, Lady Ushant. Of course I would like
to be with you. You ought not to scold me, because you know how I
love you"

This is an atom: 
"Has the young man gone away altogether now, Mary?"

This is an atom: 
"Altogether."

This is an atom: 
"And Mrs. Masters is satisfied?"

This is an atom: 
"She knows it can never be, and therefore she is quiet about it."

This is an atom: 
"I was sorry for that young man, because he was so true."

This is an atom: 
"You couldn't be more sorry than I was, Lady Ushant. I love him as
though he was a brother. But--"

This is an atom: 
"Mary, dear Mary, I fear you are in trouble."

This is an atom: 
"I think it is all trouble," said Mary, rushing forward and hiding
her face in her old friend's lap as she knelt on the ground before
her. Lady Ushant longed to ask a question, but she did not dare.
And Mary Masters longed to have one friend to whom she could
confide her secret,--but neither did she dare.

This is an atom: 
On the next day, very early in the morning, there came a note from
Mrs. Morton to Mr. Masters, the attorney. Could Mr. Masters come
out on that day to Bragton and see Mrs. Morton. The note was very
particular in saying that Mrs. Morton was to be the person seen.
The messenger who waited for an answer, brought back word that Mr.
Masters would be there at noon. The circumstance was one which
agitated him considerably, as he had not been inside the house at
Bragton since the days immediately following the death of the old
Squire. As it happened, Lady Ushant was going to Bragton on the
same day, and at the suggestion of Mr. Runciman, whose horses in
the hunting season barely sufficed for his trade, the old lady and
the lawyer went together. Not a word was said between them as to
the cause which took either of them on their journey, but they
spoke much of the days in which they had known each other, when the
old Squire was alive, and Mr. Masters thanked Lady Ushant for her
kindness to his daughter. "I love her almost as though she were my
own," said Lady Ushant. "When I am dead she will have half of what
I have got."

This is an atom: 
"She will have no right to expect that," said the gratified father.

This is an atom: 
"She will have half or the whole, just as Reginald may be situated
then. I don't know why I shouldn't tell her father what it is I
mean to do." The attorney knew to a shilling the amount of Lady
Ushant's income and thought that this was the best news he had
heard for many a day.

This is an atom: 
While Lady Ushant was in the sick man's room, Mrs. Morton was
closeted with the attorney. She had thought much of this step
before she had dared to take it and even now doubted whether it
would avail her anything. As she entered the book-room in which Mr.
Masters was seated she almost repented. But the man was there and
she was compelled to go on with her scheme. "Mr. Masters," she
said, "it is I think a long time since you have been employed by
this family."

This is an atom: 
"A very long time, Madam."

This is an atom: 
"And I have now sent for you under circumstances of great
difficulty," she answered; but as he said nothing she was forced to
go on. "My grandson made his will the other day up in London, when
he thought that he was going out to Patagonia." Mr. Masters bowed.
"It was done when he was in sound health, and he is now not
satisfied with it" Then there was another bow, but not a word was
spoken. "Of course you know that he is very ill."

This is an atom: 
"We have all been very much grieved to hear it"

This is an atom: 
"I am sure you would be, for the sake of old days. When Dr. Fanning
was last here he thought that my grandson was something better. He
held out stronger hopes than before. But still he is very ill. His
mind has never wavered for a moment, Mr. Masters." Again Mr.
Masters bowed. "And now he thinks that some changes should be
made;--indeed that there should be a new will."

This is an atom: 
"Does he wish me to see him, Mrs. Morton?"

This is an atom: 
"Not to-day, I think. He is not quite prepared to-day. But I wanted
to ask whether you could come at a moment's notice,--quite at a
moment's notice. I thought it better, so that you should know why
we sent for you if we did send,--so that you might be prepared. It
could be done here, I suppose?"

This is an atom: 
"It would be possible, Mrs. Morton."

This is an atom: 
"And you could do it?"

This is an atom: 
Then there was a long pause. "Altering a will is a very serious
thing, Mrs. Morton. And when it is done on what perhaps may be a
death-bed, it is a very serious thing indeed. Mr. Morton, I
believe, employs a London solicitor. I know the firm and more
respectable gentlemen do not exist. A telegram would bring down one
of the firm from London by the next train."

This is an atom: 
A frown, a very heavy frown, came across the old woman's brow. She
would have repressed it had it been possible;--but she could not
command herself, and the frown was there. "If that had been
practicable, Mr. Masters," she said, "we should not have sent for
you."

This is an atom: 
"I was only suggesting, madame, what might be the best course."

This is an atom: 
"Exactly. And of course I am much obliged. But if we are driven to
call upon you for your assistance, we shall find it?"

This is an atom: 
"Madame," said the attorney very slowly, "it is of course part of
my business to make wills, and when called upon to do so, I perform
my business to the best of my ability. But in altering a will
during illness great care is necessary. A codicil might be added--"

This is an atom: 
"A new will would be necessary."

This is an atom: 
A new will, thought the attorney, could only be necessary for
altering the disposition of the whole estate. He knew enough of the
family circumstances to be aware that the property should go to
Reginald Morton whether with or without a will,--and also enough to
be aware that this old lady was Reginald's bitter enemy. He did not
think that he could bring himself to take instructions from a dying
man,--from the Squire of Bragton on his death-bed,--for an
instrument which should alienate the property from the proper heir.
He too had his strong feelings, perhaps his prejudices, about
Bragton. "I would wish that the task were in other hands, Mrs.
Morton."

This is an atom: 
"Why so?"

This is an atom: 
"It is hard to measure the capacity of an invalid."

This is an atom: 
"His mind is as clear as yours"

This is an atom: 
"It might be so,--and yet I might not be able to satisfy myself
that it was so. I should have to ask long and tedious questions,
which would be offensive. And I should find myself giving advice,--
which would not be called for. For instance, were your grandson to
wish to leave this estate away from the heir--"

This is an atom: 
"I am not discussing his wishes, Mr. Masters."

This is an atom: 
"I beg your pardon, Mrs. Morton, for making the suggestion;--but as
I said before, I should prefer that he should employ some one
else."

This is an atom: 
"You refuse then?"

This is an atom: 
"If Mr. Morton were to send for me, I should go to him instantly.
But I fear I might be slow in taking his instructions;--and it is
possible that I might refuse to act on them." Then she got up from
her chair and bowing to him with stately displeasure left the room.

This is an atom: 
All this she had done without any authority from her grandson,
simply encouraged in her object by his saying in his weakness, that
he would think of her proposition. So intent was she on her
business that she was resolved to have everything ready if only he
could once be brought to say that Peter Morton should be his heir.
Having abandoned all hopes for her noble cousin she could tell her
conscience that she was instigated simply by an idea of justice.
Peter Morton was at any rate the legitimate son of a well-born
father and a wellborn mother. What had she or any one belonging to
her to gain by it? But forty years since a brat had been born at
Bragton in opposition to her wishes,--by whose means she had been
expelled from the place; and now it seemed to her to be simple
justice that he should on this account be robbed of that which
would otherwise be naturally his own. As Mr. Masters would not
serve her turn she must write to the London lawyers. The thing
would be more difficult; but, nevertheless, if the sick man could
once be got to say that Peter should be his heir she thought that
she could keep him to his word. Lady Ushant and Mr. Masters went
back to Dillsborough in Runciman's fly, and it need hardly be said
that the attorney said nothing of the business which had taken him
to Bragton.

This is an atom: 
This happened on a Wednesday,--Wednesday the 3rd of March. On
Friday morning, at 4 o'clock, during the darkness of the night,
John Morton was lying dead on his bed, and the old woman was at his
bedside. She had done her duty by him as far as she knew how in
tending him, had been assiduous with the diligence of much younger
years; but now as she sat there, having had the fact absolutely
announced to her by Dr. Nupper, her greatest agony arose from the
feeling that the roof which covered her, probably the chair in
which she sat, were the property of Reginald Morton--"Bastard!" she
said to herself between her teeth; but she so said it that neither
Dr. Nupper, who was in the room, nor the woman who was with her
should hear it.

This is an atom: 
Dr. Nupper took the news into Dillsborough, and as the folk sat
down to breakfast they all heard that the Squire of Bragton was
dead. The man had been too little known, had been too short a time
in the neighbourhood, to give occasion for tears. There was
certainly more of interest than of grief in the matter. Mr. Masters
said to himself that the time had been too short for any change in
the will, and therefore felt tolerably certain that Reginald would
be the heir. But for some days this opinion was not general in
Dillsborough. Mr. Mainwaring had heard that Reginald had been sent
away from Bragton with a flea in his ear, and was pretty certain
that when the will was read it would be found that the property was
to go to Mrs. Morton's friends. Dr. Nupper was of the same opinion.
There were many in Dillsborough with whom Reginald was not
popular;--and who thought that some man of a different kind would
do better as Squire of Bragton. "He don't know a fox when he sees
'un," said Tony Tuppett to Larry Twentyman, whom he had come across
the county to call upon and to console.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER X

This is an atom: 
The Will

This is an atom: 
On that Saturday the club met at Dillsborough,--even though the
Squire of Bragton had died on Friday morning. Through the whole of
that Saturday the town had been much exercised in its belief and
expressions, as to the disposition of the property. The town knew
very well that Mr. Masters, the attorney, had been sent for to
Bragton on the previous Wednesday,--whence the deduction as to a
new will, made of course under the auspices of Mrs. Morton, would
have been quite plain to the town, had not a portion of the town
heard that the attorney had not been for a moment with the dying
man during his visit. This latter piece of information had come
through Lady Ushant, who had been in her nephew's bedroom the whole
time;--but Lady Ushant had not much personal communication with the
town generally, and would probably have said nothing on this
subject had not Mr. Runciman walked up to Hoppet Hall behind the
fly, after Mr. Masters had left it; and, while helping her ladyship
out, made inquiry as to the condition of things at Bragton
generally. "I was sorry to hear of their sending for any lawyer,"
said Mr. Runciman. Then Lady Ushant protested that the lawyer had
not been sent for by her nephew, and that her nephew had not even
seen him. "Oh, indeed," said Mr. Runciman, who immediately took a
walk round his own paddock with the object of putting two and two
together. Mr. Runciman was a discreet man, and did not allow this
piece of information to spread itself generally. He told Dr.
Nupper, and Mr. Hampton, and Lord Rufford,--for the hounds went out
on Friday, though the Squire of Bragton was lying dead;--but he did
not tell Mr. Mainwaring, whom he encountered in the street of the
town as he was coming home early, and who was very keen to learn
whatever news there was.

This is an atom: 
Reginald Morton on Friday did not go near Bragton. That of course
was palpable to all, and was a great sign that he himself did not
regard himself as the heir. He had for awhile been very intimate at
the house, visiting it daily--and during a part of that time the
grandmother had been altogether absent. Then she had come back, and
he had discontinued his visits. And now he did not even go over to
seal up the drawers and to make arrangements as to the funeral. He
did not at any rate go on the Friday,--nor on the Saturday. And on
the Saturday Mr. Wobytrade, the undertaker, had received orders
from Mrs. Morton to go at once to Bragton. All this was felt to be
strong against Reginald. But when it was discovered that on the
Saturday afternoon Mrs. Morton herself had gone up to London, not
waiting even for the coming of any one else to take possession of
the house,--and that she had again carried all her own personal
luggage with her, then opinion in Dillsborough again veered. Upon
the whole the betting was a point or two in favour of Reginald,
when the club met.

This is an atom: 
Mrs. Masters, who had been much quelled of late, had been urgent
with her husband to go over to the Bush; but he was unwilling, he
said, to be making jolly while the Squire of Bragton was lying
unburied. "He was nothing to you, Gregory," said his wife, who had
in vain endeavoured to learn from him why he had been summoned to
Bragton--"You will hear something over there, and it will relieve
your spirits." So instigated he did go across, and found all the
accustomed members of the club congregated in the room. Even Larry
Twentyman was present, who of late had kept himself aloof from all
such meetings. Both the Botseys were there, and Nupper and Harry
Stubbings, and Ribbs the butcher. Runciman himself of course was in
the room, and he had introduced on this occasion Captain Glomax,
the master of the hunt, who was staying at his house that night,--
perhaps with a view to hunting duties on the Monday, perhaps in
order that he might hear something as to the Bragton property. It
had already been suggested to him that he might possibly hire the
house for a year or two at little more than a nominal rent, that
the old kennels might be resuscitated, and that such arrangements
would be in all respects convenient. He was the master of the hunt,
and of course there was no difficulty as to introducing him to the
club.

This is an atom: 
Captain Glomax was speaking in a somewhat dictatorial voice,--as
becomes a Master of Hounds when in the field, though perhaps it
should be dropped afterwards--when the Attorney entered. There was
a sudden rise of voices striving to interrupt the Captain, as it
was felt by them all that Mr. Masters must be in possession of
information; but the Captain himself went on. "Of course it is the
place for the hounds. Nobody can doubt that who knows the country
and understands the working of it. The hunt ought to have
subscribed and hired the kennels and stables permanently."

This is an atom: 
"There would have wanted two to that bargain, Captain," said Mr.
Runciman.

This is an atom: 
"Of course there would, but what would you think of a man who would
refuse such a proposition when he didn't want the place himself? Do
you think if I'd been there foxes would have been poisoned in
Dillsborough wood? I'd have had that fellow Goarly under my thumb."

This is an atom: 
"Then you'd have had an awful blackguard under your thumb, Captain
Glomax," said Larry, who could not restrain his wrath when Goarly's
name was mentioned.

This is an atom: 
"What does that matter, if you get foxes?" continued the Master.
"But the fact is, gentlemen in a county like this always want to
have everything done for them, and never to do anything for
themselves. I'm sick of it, I know. Nobody is fonder of hunting a
country than I am, and I think I know what I'm about."

This is an atom: 
"That you do," said Fred Botsey, who, like most men, was always
ready to flatter the Master.

This is an atom: 
"And I don't care how hard I work. From the first of August till
the end of May I never have a day to myself, what with cubbing and
then the season, and entering the young hounds, and buying and
selling horses, by George I'm at it the whole year."

This is an atom: 
"A Master of Hounds looks for that, Captain," said the innkeeper.

This is an atom: 
"Looks for it! Yes; he must look for it. But I wouldn't mind that,
if I could get gentlemen to pull a little with me. I can't stand
being out of pocket as I have been, and so I must let them know. If
the country would get the kennels and the stables, and lay out a
few pounds so that horses and hounds and men could go into them, I
wouldn't mind having a shot for the house. It's killing work where
I am now, the other side of Rufford, you may say." Then he
stopped;--but no one would undertake to answer him. The meaning of
it was that Captain Glomax wanted 500 pounds a year more than he
received, and every one there knew that there was not 500 pounds a
year more to be got out of the country,--unless Lord Rufford would
put his hand into his pocket. Now the present stables and the
present kennels had been "made comfortable" by Lord Rufford, and it
was not thought probable that he would pay for the move to Bragton.

This is an atom: 
"When's the funeral to be, Mr. Masters?" asked Runciman,--who knew
very well the day fixed, but who thought it well to get back to the
subject of real interest in the town.

This is an atom: 
"Next Thursday, I'm told."

This is an atom: 
"There's no hurry with weather like this," said Nupper
professionally.

This is an atom: 
"They can't open the will till the late squire is buried,"
continued the innkeeper, "and there will be one or two very anxious
to know what is in it"

This is an atom: 
"I suppose it will all go to the man who lives up here at Hoppet
Hall," said the Captain,--"a man that was never outside a horse in
his life!"

This is an atom: 
"He's not a bad fellow," said Runciman.

This is an atom: 
"He is a very good fellow," said the Attorney, "and I trust he may
have the property. If it be left away from him, I for one shall
think that a great injustice has been done." This was listened to
with attention, as every one there thought that Mr. Masters must
know.

This is an atom: 
"I can't understand," said Glomax, "how any man can be considered a
good fellow as a country gentleman who does not care for sport.
Just look at it all round. Suppose others were like him what would
become of us all?"

This is an atom: 
"Yes indeed, what would become of us?" asked the two Botseys in a
breath.

This is an atom: 
"Ho'd 'ire our 'orses, Runciman?" suggested Harry Stubbings with a
laugh.

This is an atom: 
"Think what England would be!" said the Captain. "When I hear of a
country gentleman sticking to books and all that, I feel that the
glory is departing from the land. Where are the sinews of war to
come from? That's what I want to know."

This is an atom: 
"Who will it be, Mr. Masters, if the gent don't get it?" asked
Ribbs from his corner on the sofa. This was felt to be a pushing
question. "How am I to know, Mr. Ribbs?" said the Attorney. "I
didn't make the late squire's will; and if I did you don't suppose
I should tell you."

This is an atom: 
"I'm told that the next is Peter Morton," said Fred Botsey. "He's
something in a public office up in London."

This is an atom: 
"It won't go to him," said Fred's brother. "That old lady has
relations of her own who have had their mouths open for the last
forty years"

This is an atom: 
"Away from the Mortons altogether!" said Harry. "That would be an
awful shame!"

This is an atom: 
"I don't see what good the Mortons have done this last half
century," said the Captain.

This is an atom: 
"You don't remember the old squire, Captain," said the innkeeper,
"and I don't remember him well. Indeed I was only a little chap
when they buried him. But there's that feeling left behind him to
this day, that not a poor man in the country wouldn't be sorry to
think that there wasn't a Morton left among 'em. Of course a
hunting gentleman is a good thing."

This is an atom: 
"About the best thing out," said the Captain.

This is an atom: 
"But a hunting gentleman isn't everything. I know nothing of the
old lady's people,--only this that none of their money ever came
into Dillsborough. I'm all for Reginald Morton. He's my landlord as
it is, and he's a gentleman."

This is an atom: 
"I hate foreigners coming," said Ribbs.

This is an atom: 
"'E ain't too old to take it yet," said Harry. Fred Botsey declared
that he didn't believe in men hunting unless they began young.
Whereupon Dr. Nupper declared that he had never ridden over a fence
till he was forty-five, and that he was ready now to ride Fred
across country for a new hat. Larry suggested that a man might be a
good friend to sport though he didn't ride much himself; and
Runciman again asserted that hunting wasn't everything. Upon the
whole Reginald was the favourite. But the occasion was so special
that a little supper was ordered, and I fear the attorney did not
get home till after twelve.

This is an atom: 
Till the news reached Hoppet Hall that Mrs. Morton had taken
herself off to London, there was great doubt there as to what ought
to be done, and even then the difficulty was not altogether over.
Till she was gone neither Lady Ushant nor her nephew would go
there, and he could only declare his purpose of attending the
funeral whether he were asked or not. When his aunt again spoke of
the will he desired her with much emphasis not to allude to the
subject. "If the property is to come to me," he said, "anything of
good that may be in it cannot be much sweeter by anticipation. And
if it is not I shall only encourage disappointment by thinking of
it."

This is an atom: 
"But it would be such a shame."

This is an atom: 
"That I deny altogether. It was his own to do as he liked with it.
Had he married I should not have expected it because I am the heir.
But, if you please, aunt, do not say a word more about it."

This is an atom: 
THE AMERICAN SENATOR.

This is an atom: 
On the Sunday morning he heard that Mrs. Morton was gone to London,
and then he walked over to Bragton. He found that she had locked
and sealed up everything with so much precision that she must have
worked hard at the task from the hour of his death almost to that
of her departure. "She never rested herself all day," said Mrs.
Hopkins, "till I thought she would sink from very weariness." She
had gone into every room and opened every drawer, and had had every
piece of plate through her fingers, and then Mrs. Hopkins told him
that just as she was departing she had said that the keys would be
given to the lawyer. After that he wandered about the place,
thinking what his life would be should he find himself the owner of
Bragton. At this moment he almost felt that he disliked the place,
though there had been times in which he had thought that he loved
it too well. Of one thing he was conscious,--that if Bragton should
become his, it would be his duty to live there. He must move his
books, and pipes, and other household gods from Hoppet Hall and
become an English Squire. Would it be too late for him to learn to
ride to hounds? Would it be possible that he should ever succeed in
shooting a pheasant, if he were to study the art patiently? Could
he interest himself as to the prevalence or decadence of ground
game? And what must he do with his neighbours? Of course he would
have to entertain Mr. Mainwaring and the other parsons, and perhaps
once in the year to ask Lord Rufford to dine with him. If Lord
Rufford came, what on earth would he say to him?

This is an atom: 
And then there arose another question. Would it not be his duty to
marry,---and, if so, whom? He had been distinctly told that Mary
Morton had given her heart to some one, and he certainly was not
the man to ask for the hand of a girl who had not a heart to give.
And yet thought that it would be impossible that he should marry
any other person. He spent hours in walking about the grounds,
looking at the garden and belongings which would so probably be his
own within a week, and thinking whether it would be possible that
he should bring a mistress to preside over them. Before he reached
home he had made up his mind that only one mistress would be
possible, and that she was beyond his reach.

This is an atom: 
On the Tuesday he received a scrawl from Mrs. Hopkins with a letter
from the lawyer--addressed to her. The lawyer wrote to say that he
would be down on Wednesday evening, would attend the funeral, and
read his client's will after they had performed the ceremony. He
went on to add that in obedience to Mrs. Morton's directions he had
invited Mr. Peter Morton to be present on the occasion. On the
Wednesday Reginald again went over, but left before the arrival of
the two gentlemen. On the Thursday he was there early, and of
course took upon himself the duty of chief mourner. Peter Morton
was there and showed, in a bewildered way, that he had been
summoned rather to the opening of the will than to the funeral of a
man he had never seen.

This is an atom: 
Then the will was read. There were only two names mentioned in it.
John Morton left 5,000 pounds and his watch and chain and rings to
Arabella Trefoil, and everything else of which he was possessed to
his cousin Reginald Morton.

This is an atom: 
"Upon my word I don't know why they sent for me," said the other
cousin, Peter.

This is an atom: 
"Mrs. Morton seemed to think that you would like to pay a tribute
of respect," said the lawyer. Peter looked at him and went upstairs
and packed his portmanteau. The lawyer handed over the keys to the
new squire, and then everything was done.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XI

This is an atom: 
The New Minister

This is an atom: 
"Poor old Paragon!" exclaimed Archibald Currie, as he stood with
his back to the fire among his colleagues at the Foreign Office on
the day after John Morton's death.

This is an atom: 
"Poor young Paragon! that's the pity of it," said Mounser Green. "I
don't suppose he was turned thirty, and he was a useful man,--a
very useful man. That's the worst of it. He was just one of those
men that the country can't afford to lose, and whom it is so very
hard to replace." Mounser Green was always eloquent as to the needs
of the public service, and did really in his heart of hearts care
about his office. "Who is to go to Patagonia, I'm sure I don't
know. Platitude was asking me about it, and I told him that I
couldn't name a man."

This is an atom: 
"Old Platitude always thinks that the world is coming to an end,"
said Currie. "There are as good fish in the sea as ever were
caught"

This is an atom: 
"Who is there? Monsoon won't go, even if they ask him. The Paragon
was just the fellow for it. He had his heart in the work. An
immense deal depends on what sort of man we have in Patagonia at
the present moment. If Paraguay gets the better of the Patagonese
all Brazil will be in a ferment, and you know how that kind of
thing spreads among half-caste Spaniards and Portuguese. Nobody can
interfere but the British Minister. When I suggested Morton I knew
I had the right man if he'd only take it"

This is an atom: 
"And now he has gone and died!" said Hoffmann.

This is an atom: 
"And now he has gone and died," continued Mounser Green. "'I never
nursed a dear gazelle,' and all the rest of it. Poor Paragon! I
fear he was a little cut about Miss Trefoil."

This is an atom: 
"She was down with him the day before he died," said young Glossop.
"I happen to know that"

This is an atom: 
"It was before he thought of going to Patagonia that she was at
Bragton," said Currie.

This is an atom: 
"That's all you know about it, old fellow," said the indignant
young one. "She was there a second time, just before his death. I
had it from Lady Penwether who was in the neighbourhood."

This is an atom: 
"My dear little boy," said Mounser Green, "that was exactly what
was likely to happen, and he yet may have broken his heart. I have
seen a good deal of the lady lately, and under no circumstances
would she have married him. When he accepted the mission that at
any rate was all over."

This is an atom: 
"The Rufford affair had begun before that," said Hoffmann.

This is an atom: 
"The Rufford affair as you call it," said Glossop, "was no affair
at all."

This is an atom: 
"What do you mean by that?" asked Currie.

This is an atom: 
"I mean. that Rufford was never engaged to her,--not for an
instant," said the lad, urgent in spreading the lesson which he had
received from his cousin. "It was all a dead take-in."

This is an atom: 
"Who was taken in?" asked Mounser Green.

This is an atom: 
"Well;--nobody was taken in as it happened. But I suppose there
can't be a doubt that she tried her best to catch him, and that the
Duke and Duchess and Mistletoe, and old Trefoil, all backed her up.
It was a regular plant. The only thing is, it didn't come off."

This is an atom: 
"Look here, young shaver;"--this was Mounser Green again; "when you
speak of a young lady do you be a little more discreet"

This is an atom: 
"But didn't she do it, Green?"

This is an atom: 
"That's more than you or I can tell. If you want to know what I
think, I believe he paid her a great deal of attention and then
behaved very badly to her."

This is an atom: 
"He didn't behave badly at all," said young Glossop.

This is an atom: 
"My dear boy, when you are as old as I am, you will have learned
how very hard it is to know everything. I only say what I believe,
and perhaps I may have better ground for believing than you. He
certainly paid her a great deal of attention, and then her
friends,--especially the Duchess,--went to work."

This is an atom: 
"They've wanted to get her off their hands these six or eight
years," said Currie.

This is an atom: 
"That's nonsense again," continued the new advocate, "for there is
no doubt she might have married Morton all the time had she
pleased."

This is an atom: 
"Yes;--but Rufford!--a fellow with sixty thousand a year!" said
Glossop.

This is an atom: 
"About a third of that would be nearer the mark, Glossy. Take my
word for it, you don't know everything yet, though you have so many
advantages." After that Mounser Green retreated to his own room
with a look and tone as though he were angry.

This is an atom: 
"What makes him so ferocious about it?" asked Glossop when the door
was shut.

This is an atom: 
"You are always putting your foot in it," said Currie. "I kept on
winking to you but it was no good. He sees her almost every day
now. She's staying with old Mrs. Green in Portugal Street. There
has been some break up between her and her mother, and old Mrs.
Green has taken her in. There's some sort of relationship. Mounser
is the old woman's nephew, and she is aunt by marriage to the
Connop Greens down in Hampshire, and Mrs. Connop Green is first
cousin to Lady Augustus."

This is an atom: 
"If Dick's sister married Tom's brother what relation would Dick be
to Tom's mother? That's the kind of thing, isn't it?" suggested
Hoffmann.

This is an atom: 
"At any rate there she is, and Mounser sees her every day."

This is an atom: 
"It don't make any difference about Rufford," said young Glossop
stoutly.

This is an atom: 
All this happened before the will had been declared,--when Arabella
did not dream that she was an heiress. A day or two afterwards she
received a letter from the lawyer, telling her of her good fortune,
and informing her that the trinkets would be given up to her and
the money paid,--short of legacy duty,--whenever she would fix a
time and place. The news almost stunned her. There was a moment in
which she thought that she was bound to reject this money, as she
had rejected that tendered to her by the other man. Poor as she
was, greedy as she was, alive as she was to the necessity of doing
something for herself,--still this legacy was to her at first
bitter rather than sweet. She had never treated any man so ill as
she had treated this man; and it was thus that he punished her! She
was alive to the feeling that he had always been true to her. In
her intercourse with other men there had been generally a battle
carried on with some fairness. Diamond had striven to cut diamond.
But here the dishonesty had all been on one side, and she was aware
that it had been so. In her later affair with Lord Rufford, she
really did think that she had been ill used; but she was quite
alive to the fact that her treatment of John Morton had been
abominable. The one man, in order that he might escape without
further trouble, had in the grossest manner, sent to her the offer
of a bribe. The other,--in regard to whose end her hard heart was
touched, even her conscience seared, had named her in his will as
though his affection was unimpaired. Of course she took the money,
but she took it with inward groans. She took the money and the
trinkets, and the matter was all arranged for her by Mounser Green.

This is an atom: 
"So after all the Paragon left her whatever he could leave," said
Currie in the same room at the Foreign Office. A week had passed
since the last conversation, and at this moment Mounser Green was
not in the room.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, dear no," said young Glossy. "She doesn't have Bragton. That
goes to his cousin."

This is an atom: 
"That was entailed, Glossy, my boy."

This is an atom: 
"Not a bit of it. Everybody thought he would leave the place to
another Morton, a fellow he'd never seen, in one of those Somerset
House Offices. He and this fellow who is to have it, were
enemies,--but he wouldn't put it out of the right line. It's all
very well for Mounser to be down on me, but I do happen to know
what goes on in that country. She gets a pot of money, and no end
of family jewels; but he didn't leave her the estate as he might
have done."

This is an atom: 
At that moment Mounser Green came into the room. It was rather
later than usual, being past one o'clock; and he looked as though
he were flurried. He didn't speak for a few minutes, but stood
before the fire smoking a cigar. And there was a general silence,
there being now a feeling among them that Arabella Trefoil was not
to be talked about in the old way before Mounser Green. At last he
spoke himself. "I suppose you haven't heard who is to go to
Patagonia after all?"

This is an atom: 
"Is it settled?" asked Currie.

This is an atom: 
"Anybody we know?" asked Hoffmann.

This is an atom: 
"I hope it's no d-- outsider," said the too energetic Glossop.

This is an atom: 
"It is settled; and it is somebody you know; and it is not a d--
outsider; unless, indeed, he may be considered to be an outsider in
reference to that branch of the service."

This is an atom: 
"It's some consul," said Currie. "Backstairs from Panama, I'll bet
a crown."

This is an atom: 
"It isn't Backstairs, it isn't a consul. Gentlemen, get out your
pocket-handkerchiefs. Mounser Green has consented to be expatriated
for the good of his country."

This is an atom: 
"You going to Patagonia!" said Currie. "You're chaffing," said
Glossop. "I never was so shot in my life," said Hoffmann.

This is an atom: 
"It's true, my dear boys."

This is an atom: 
"I never was so sorry for anything in all my born days," said
Glossop, almost crying. "Why on earth should you go to Patagonia?"

This is an atom: 
"Patagonia!" ejaculated Currie. "What will you do in Patagonia?"

This is an atom: 
"It's an opening, my dear fellow," said Mounser Green leaning
affectionately on Glossop's shoulder. "What should I do by
remaining here? When Drummond asked me I saw he wanted me to go.
They don't forget that kind of thing." At that moment a messenger
opened the door, and the Senator Gotobed, almost without being
announced, entered the room. He had become so intimate of late at
the Foreign Office, and his visits were so frequent, that he was
almost able to dispense with the assistance of any messenger.
Perhaps Mounser Green and his colleagues were a little tired of
him; but yet, after their fashion, they were always civil to him,
and remembered, as they were bound to do, that he was one of the
leading politicians of a great nation. "I have secured the hall,"
he said at once, as though aware that no news could be so important
as the news he thus conveyed.

This is an atom: 
"Have you indeed?" said Currie.

This is an atom: 
"Secured it for the fifteenth. Now the question is-"

This is an atom: 
"What do you think," said Glossop, interrupting him without the
slightest hesitation. "Mounser Green is going to Patagonia, in
place of the poor Paragon."

This is an atom: 
"I beg to congratulate Mr. Green with all my heart."

This is an atom: 
"By George I don't," said the juvenile clerk. "Fancy congratulating
a fellow on going to Patagonia! It's what I call an awful sell for
everybody."

This is an atom: 
"But as I was saying I have the hall for the fifteenth."

This is an atom: 
"You mean to lecture then after all," said Green.

This is an atom: 
"Certainly I do, I am not going to be deterred from doing my duty
because I am told there is a little danger. What I want to know is
whether I can depend on having a staff of policemen."

This is an atom: 
"Of course there will be police," said Green.

This is an atom: 
"But I mean some extra strength. I don't mind for myself, but I
should be so unhappy if there were anything of a commotion." Then
he was assured that the officers of the police force would look to
that, and was assured also that Mounser Green and the other
gentlemen in the room would certainly attend the lecture. "I don't
suppose I shall be gone by that time," said Mounser Green in a
melancholy tone of voice.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XII

This is an atom: 
"I must go"

This is an atom: 
Rufford, March 5th.

This is an atom: 
My Dear Miss Trefoil,

This is an atom: 
I am indeed sorry that I should have offended you by acceding to a
suggestion which, I think I may say, originated with your mother.
When she told me that her circumstances and yours were not in a
pecuniary point of view so comfortable as they might be, I did feel
that it was in my power to alleviate that trouble. The sum of money
mentioned by my lawyer was certainly named by your mother. At any
rate pray believe that I meant to be of service.

This is an atom: 
As to naming a place where we might meet, it really could be of no
service. It would be painful to both of us and could have no good
result. Again apologizing for having inadvertently offended you by
adopting the views which Lady Augustus entertained, I beg to assure
you that I am,

This is an atom: 
Yours faithfully,
                         Rufford.

This is an atom: 
This letter came from the peer himself, without assistance. After
his interview with Lady Augustus he simply told his Mentor, Sir
George, that he had steadfastly denied the existence of any
engagement, not daring to acquaint him with the offer he had made.
Neither, therefore, could he tell Sir George of the manner in which
the young lady had repudiated the offer. That she should have
repudiated it was no doubt to her credit. As he thought of it
afterwards he felt that had she accepted it she would have been
base indeed. And. yet, as he thought of what had taken place at the
house in Piccadilly, he was confident that the proposition had in
some way come from her mother. No doubt he had first written a sum
of money on the fragment of paper which she had preserved;--and the
evidence would so far go against him. But Lady Augustus had spoken
piteously of their joint poverty,--and had done so in lieu of
insisting with a mother's indignation on her daughter's rights. Of
course she had intended to ask for money. What other purpose could
she have had? It was so he had argued at the moment, and so he had
argued since. If it were so he would not admit that he had behaved
unlike a gentleman in offering the money. Yet he did not dare to
tell Sir George, and therefore was obliged to answer Arabella's
letter without assistance.

This is an atom: 
He was not altogether sorry to have his 8,000 pounds, being fully
as much alive to the value of money as any brother peer in the
kingdom, but he would sooner have paid the money than be subject to
an additional interview. He had been forced up to London to see
first the father and then the mother, and thought that he had paid
penalty enough for any offence that he might have committed. An
additional interview with the young lady herself would distress him
beyond anything,--would be worse than any other interview. He would
sooner leave Rufford and go abroad than encounter it. He promised
himself that nothing should induce him to encounter it. Therefore
he wrote the above letter.

This is an atom: 
Arabella, when she received it, had ceased to care very much about
the insult of the offer. She had then quarrelled with her mother,
and had insisted on some separation even without any arrangement as
to funds. Requiring some confidant, she had told a great deal,
though not quite all, to Mrs. Connop Green, and that lady had
passed her on for a while to her husband's aunt in London. At this
time she had heard nothing of John Morton's will, and had perhaps
thought with some tender regret of the munificence of her other
lover, which she had scorned. But she was still intent on doing
something. The fury of her despair was still on her, so that she
could not weigh the injury she might do herself against some
possible gratification to her wounded spirit. Up to this moment she
had formed no future hope. At this epoch she had no string to her
bow. John Morton was dead; and she had absolutely wept for him in
solitude, though she had certainly never loved him. Nor did she
love Lord Rufford. As far as she knew how to define her feelings,
she thought that she hated him. But she told herself hourly that
she had not done with him. She was instigated by the true feminine
Medea feeling that she would find some way to wring his heart,--
even though in the process she might suffer twice as much as he
did. She had convinced herself that in this instance he was the
offender. "Painful to both of us!" No doubt! But because it would
be painful to him, it should be exacted. Though he was a coward and
would fain shirk such pain, she could be brave enough. Even though
she should be driven to catch him by the arm in the open street,
she would have it out with him. He was a liar and a coward, and she
would, at any rate, have the satisfaction of telling him so.

This is an atom: 
She thought much about it before she could resolve on what she
would do. She could not ask old Mrs. Green to help her. Mrs. Green
was a kind old woman, who had lived much in the world, and would
wish to see much of it still, had age allowed her. Arabella Trefoil
was at any rate the niece of a Duke, and the Duke, in this affair
with Lord Rufford, had taken his niece's part. She opened her house
and as much of her heart as was left to Arabella, and was ready to
mourn with her over the wicked lord. She could sympathise with her
too, as to the iniquities of her mother, whom none of the Greens
loved. But she would have been frightened by any proposition as to
Medean vengeance.

This is an atom: 
In these days,--still winter days, and not open to much feminine
gaiety in London, even if, in the present constitution of her
circumstances, gaiety would have come in her way,--in these days
the hours in her life which interested her most, were those in
which Mr. Mounser Green was dutifully respectful to his aunt.
Patagonia had not yet presented itself to him. Some four or five
hundred a year, which the old lady had at her own disposal, had for
years past contributed to Mounser's ideas of duty. And now
Arabella's presence at the small house in Portugal Street certainly
added a new zest to those ideas. The niece of the Duke of Mayfair,
and the rejected of Lord Rufford, was at the present moment an
interesting young woman in Mounser Green's world. There were many
who thought that she had been ill-used. Had she succeeded, all the
world would have pitied Lord Rufford; but as he had escaped, there
was a strong party for the lady. And gradually Mounser Green, who
some weeks ago had not thought very much of her, became one of the
party. She had brought her maid with her; and when she found that
Mounser Green came to the house every evening, either before or
after dinner, she had recourse to her accustomed lures. She would
sit quiet, dejected, almost broken-hearted in the corner of a sofa;
but when he spoke to her she would come to life and raise her
eyes,--not ignoring the recognised dejection of her jilted
position, not pretending to this minor stag of six tines that she
was a sprightly unwooed young fawn, fresh out of the forest,--
almost asking him to weep with her, and playing her accustomed
lures, though in a part which she had not hitherto filled.

This is an atom: 
But still she was resolved that her Jason should not as yet be quit
of his Medea. So she made her plot. She would herself go down to
Rufford and force her way into her late lover's presence in spite
of all obstacles. It was possible that she should do this and get
back to London the same day,--but, to do so, she must leave London
by an early train at 7 A.M., stay seven or eight hours at Rufford,
and reach the London station at 10 P.M. For such a journey there
must be some valid excuse made to Mrs. Green. There must be some
necessity shown for such a journey. She would declare that a
meeting was necessary with her mother, and that her mother was at
any town she chose to name at the requisite distance from London.
In this way she might start with her maid before daylight, and get
back after dark, and have the meeting with her mother--or with Lord
Rufford as the case might be. But Mounser Green knew very well that
Lady Augustus was in Orchard Street, and knew also that Arabella
was determined not to see her mother. And if she declared her
purpose, without a caution to Mounser Green, the old woman would
tell her nephew, and the nephew would unwittingly expose the
deceit. It was necessary therefore that she should admit Mounser
Green to, at any rate, half a confidence. This she did. "Don't ask
me any questions," she said. "I know I can trust you. I must be out
of town the whole day, and perhaps the next. And your aunt must not
know why I am going or where. You will help me?" Of course he said
that he would help her; and the lie, with a vast accompaniment of
little lies, was told. There must be a meeting on business matters
between her and her mother, and her mother was now in the
neighbourhood of Birmingham. This was the lie told to Mrs. Green.
She would go down, and, if possible, be back on the same day. She
would take her maid with her. She thought that in such a matter as
that she could trust her maid, and was in truth afraid to travel
alone.

This is an atom: 
"I will come in the morning and take Miss Trefoil to the station,"
said Mounser, "and will meet her in the evening."` And so the
matter was arranged.

This is an atom: 
The journey was not without its drawbacks and almost its perils.
Summer or winter Arabella Trefoil was seldom out of bed before
nine. It was incumbent on her now to get up on a cold March
morning,--when the lion had not as yet made way for the lamb,--at
half-past five. That itself seemed to be all but impossible to her.
Nevertheless she was ready and had tried to swallow half a cup of
tea, when Mounser Green came to the door with a cab a little after
six. She had endeavoured to dispense with this new friend's
attendance, but he had insisted, assuring her that without some
such aid no cab would be forthcoming. She had not told him and did
not intend that he should know to what station she was going. "You
begged me to ask no questions," he said when he was in the cab with
her, the maid having been induced most unwillingly to seat herself
with the cabman on the box,--"and I have obeyed you. But I wish I
knew how I could help you."

This is an atom: 
"You have helped me, and you are helping me. But do not ask
anything more."

This is an atom: 
"Will you be angry with me if I say that I fear you are intending
something rash?"

This is an atom: 
"Of course I am. How could it be otherwise with me? Don't you think
there are turns in a person's life when she must do something rash.
Think of yourself. If everybody crushed you; if you were
ill-treated beyond all belief; if the very people who ought to trust
you doubted you, wouldn't you turn upon somebody and rend him?"

This is an atom: 
"Are you going to rend anybody?"

This is an atom: 
"I do not know as yet."

This is an atom: 
"I wish you would let me go down with you."

This is an atom: 
"No; that you certainly cannot. You must not come even into the
station with me. You have been very good to me. You will not now
turn against me."

This is an atom: 
"I certainly will do nothing--but what you tell me."

This is an atom: 
"Then here we are,--and now you must go. Jane can carry my hand-bag
and cloak. If you choose to come in the evening at ten it will be
an additional favour."

This is an atom: 
"I certainly will do so. But Miss Trefoil, one word." They were now
standing under cover of the portico in front of the railway
station, into which he was not to be allowed to enter. "What I fear
is this; that in your first anger you may be tempted to do
something which may be injurious to your prospects in life"

This is an atom: 
"I have no prospects in life, Mr. Green."

This is an atom: 
"Ah;--that is just it. There are for most of us moments of
unhappiness in which we are tempted by our misery to think that we
are relieved at any rate from the burden of caution, because
nothing that can occur to us can make us worse than we are."

This is an atom: 
"Nothing can make me worse than I am."

This is an atom: 
"But in a few months or weeks," continued Mounser Green, bringing
up in his benevolence all the wisdom of his experience, "we have
got a new footing amidst our troubles, and then we may find how
terrible is the injury which our own indiscretion has brought on
us. I do not want to ask any questions, but--it might be so much
better that you should abandon your intention, and go back with
me."

This is an atom: 
She seemed to be almost undecided for a moment as she thought over
his words. But she remembered her pledge to herself that Lord
Rufford should find that she had not done with him yet. "I must
go," she said in a hoarse voice.

This is an atom: 
"If you must-"

This is an atom: 
"I must go. I have no way out of it. Good-bye, Mr. Green; I cannot
tell you how much obliged to you I am." Then he turned back and she
went into the station and took two first-class tickets for Rufford.
At that moment Lord Rufford was turning himself comfortably in his
bed. How would he have sprung up, and how would he have fled, had
he known the evil that was coming upon him! This happened on a
Thursday, a day on which, as Arabella knew, the U.R.U. did not go
out;--the very Thursday on which John Morton was buried and the
will was read at Bragton.

This is an atom: 
She was fully determined to speak her mind to the man and to be
checked by no feminine squeamishness. She would speak her mind to
him if she could force her way into his presence. And in doing this
she would be debarred by no etiquette. It might be that she would
fail, that he would lack the courage to see her, and would run
away, even before all his servants, when he should hear who was
standing in his hall. But if he did so she would try again, even
though she should have to ride out into the hunting-field after
him. Face to face she would tell him that he was a liar and a
slanderer and no gentleman, though she should have to run round the
world to catch him. When she reached Rufford she went to the town
and ordered breakfast and a carriage. As soon as she had eaten the
meal she desired the driver in a clear voice to take her to Rufford
Hall. Was her maid to go with her? No. She would be back soon, and
her maid would wait there till she had returned.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XIII

This is an atom: 
In the Park

This is an atom: 
This thing that she was doing required an infinite amount of
pluck,--of that sort of hardihood which we may not quite call
courage, but which in a world well provided with policemen is
infinitely more useful than courage. Lord Rufford himself was
endowed with all the ordinary bravery of an Englishman, but he
could have flown as soon as run into a lion's den as Arabella was
doing. She had learned that Lady Penwether and Miss Penge were both
at Rufford Hall, and understood well the difficulty there would be
in explaining her conduct should she find herself in their
presence. And there were all the servants there to stare at her,
and the probability that she might be shown to the door and told
that no one there would speak to her. She saw it all before her,
and knew how bitter it might be; but her heart was big enough to
carry her through it. She was dressed very simply, but still by no
means dowdily, in a black silk dress, and though she wore a thick
veil when she got out of the fly and rang the door bell, she had
been at some pains with her hair before she left the inn. Her
purpose was revenge; but still she had an eye to the possible
chance,--the chance barely possible of bringing the man to submit.

This is an atom: 
When the door was opened she raised her veil and asked for Lord
Rufford; but as she did so she walked on through the broad passage
which led from the front door into a wide central space which they
called the billiard-room but which really was the hall of the
house. This she did as a manifesto that she did not mean to leave
the house because she might be told that he was out or could not be
seen, or that he was engaged. It was then nearly one o'clock, and
no doubt he would be there for luncheon. Of course he might be in
truth away from home, but she must do her best to judge of that by
the servant's manner. The man knew her well, and not improbably had
heard something of his master's danger. He was, however, very
respectful and told her that his lordship was out in the grounds;--
but that Lady Penwether was in the drawing-room. Then a sudden
thought struck her, and she asked the man whether he would show her
in what part of the grounds she might find Lord Rufford. Upon that
he took her to the front door and pointing across the park to a
belt of trees, showed her three or four men standing round some
piece of work. He believed, he said, that one of those men was his
lordship.

This is an atom: 
She bowed her thanks and was descending the steps on her way to
join the group, when whom should she see but Lady Penwether coming
into the house with her garden-hat and gloves. It was unfortunate;
but she would not allow herself to be stopped by Lady Penwether.
She bowed stiffly and would have passed on without a word, but that
was impossible. "Miss Trefoil!" said Lady Penwether with
astonishment.

This is an atom: 
"Your brother is just across the park. I think I see him and will
go to him."

This is an atom: 
"I had better send and tell him that you are here," said her
ladyship.

This is an atom: 
"I need not trouble you so far. I can be my own messenger. Perhaps
you will allow the fly to be sent round to the yard for
half-an-hour." As she said this she was still passing down the steps.

This is an atom: 
But Lady Penwether knew that it behoved her to prevent this if it
might be possible. Of late she had had little or no conversation
with her brother about Miss Trefoil, but she had heard much from
her husband. She would be justified, she thought, in saying or in
doing almost anything which would save him from such an encounter.
"I really think," she said, "that he had better be told that you
are here," and as she spoke she strove to put herself in the
visitor's way. "You had better come in, Miss Trefoil, and he shall
be informed at once."

This is an atom: 
"By no means, Lady Penwether. I would not for worlds give him or
you so much trouble. I see him and I will go to him." Then Lady
Penwether absolutely put out her hand to detain her; but Arabella
shook it off angrily and looked into the other woman's face with
fierce eyes. "Allow me," she said, "to conduct myself at this
moment as I may think best. I shall do so at any rate." Then she
stalked on and Lady Penwether saw that any contest was hopeless.
Had she sent the servant on with all his speed, so as to gain three
or four moments, her brother could hardly have fled through the
trees in face of the enemy.

This is an atom: 
Lord Rufford, who was busy planning the prolongation of a ha-ha
fence, saw nothing of all this; but, after a while he was aware
that a woman was coming to him, and then gradually he saw who that
woman was. Arabella when she had found herself advancing closer
went slowly enough. She was sure of her prey now, and was wisely
mindful that it might be well that she should husband her breath.
The nearer she drew to him the slower became her pace, and more
majestic. Her veil was well thrown back, and her head was raised in
the air. She knew these little tricks of deportment and could carry
herself like a queen. He had taken a moment or two to consider.
Should he fly? It was possible. He might vault over a railed fence
in among the trees, at a spot not ten yards from her, and then it
would be impossible that she should run him down. He might have
done it had not the men been there to see it. As it was he left
them in the other direction and came forward to meet her. He tried
to smile pleasantly as he spoke to her. "So I see that you would
not take my advice," he said.

This is an atom: 
"Neither your advice nor your money, my lord."

This is an atom: 
"Ah,--I was so sorry about that! But, indeed, indeed,--the fault
was not mine."

This is an atom: 
"They were your figures that I saw upon the paper, and by your
orders, no doubt, that the lawyer acted. But I have not come to say
much of that. You meant I suppose to be gracious."

This is an atom: 
"I meant to be--good-natured."

This is an atom: 
"I daresay. You were willing enough to give away what you did not
want. But there must be more between us than any question of money.
Lord Rufford you have treated me most shamefully."

This is an atom: 
"I hope not. I think not."

This is an atom: 
"And you yourself must be well aware of it,--quite as well aware of
it as I am. You have thrown me over and absolutely destroyed me;--
and why?" He shrugged his shoulders. "Because you have been afraid
of others; because your sister has told you that you were mistaken
in your choice. The women around you have been too many for you,
and have not allowed you to dispose of your hand, and your name,
and your property as you pleased. I defy you to say that this was
not your sister's doing." He was too much astounded to contradict
her rapidly, and then she passed on, not choosing to give him time
for contradiction. "Will you have the hardihood to say that you did
not love me?" Then she paused thinking that he would not dare to
contradict her then, feeling that in that she was on strong ground.
"Were you lying when you told me that you did? What did you mean
when I was in your arms up in the house there? What did you intend
me to think that you meant?" Then she stopped, standing well in
front of him, and looking fixedly into his face.

This is an atom: 
This was the very thing that he had feared. Lord Augustus had been
a trouble. The Duke's letter had been a trouble. Lady Augustus had
been a trouble; and Sir George's sermons had been troublesome. But
what were they all when compared to this? How is it possible that a
man should tell a girl that he has not loved her, when he has
embraced her again and again? He may know it, and she may know
it;--and each may know that the other knows it;--but to say that he
does not and did not then love her is beyond the scope of his
audacity,--unless he be a heartless Nero. "No one can grieve about
this so much as I do," he said weakly.

This is an atom: 
"Cannot I grieve more, do you think,--I who told all my relatives
that I was to become your wife, and was justified in so telling
them? Was I not justified?"

This is an atom: 
"I think not."

This is an atom: 
"You think not! What did you mean then? What were you thinking of
when we were coming back in the carriage from Stamford,--when with
your arms round me you swore that you loved me better than all the
world? Is that true? Did you so swear?" What a question for a man
to have to answer! It was becoming clear to him that there was
nothing for him but to endure and be silent. Even to this interview
the gods would at last give an end. The hour would pass, though,
alas, so slowly, and she could not expect that he should stand
there to be rated much after the accustomed time for feeding. "You
acknowledge that, and do you dare to say that I had no right to
tell my friends?"

This is an atom: 
There was a moment in which he thought it was almost a pity that he
had not married her. She was very beautiful in her present form,--
more beautiful he thought than ever. She was the niece of a Duke,
and certainly a very clever woman. He had not wanted money and why
shouldn't he have married her? As for hunting him,--that was a
matter of course. He was as much born and bred to be hunted as a
fox. He could not do it now as he had put too much power into the
hands of the Penwethers, but he almost wished that he had. "I never
intended it," he said.

This is an atom: 
"What did you intend? After what has occurred I suppose I have a
right to ask such a question. I have made a somewhat unpleasant
journey to-day, all alone, on purpose to ask that question. What
did you intend?" In his great annoyance he struck his shovel
angrily against the ground. "And I will not leave you till I get an
answer to the question. What did you intend, Lord Rufford?" There
was nothing for him but silence and a gradual progress back towards
the house.

This is an atom: 
But from the latter resource she cut him off for a time. "You will
do me the favour to remain with me here till this conversation is
ended. You cannot refuse me so slight a request as that, seeing the
trouble to which you have put me. I never saw a man so forgetful of
words. You cannot speak. Have you no excuse to offer, not a word to
say in explanation--of conduct so black that I don't think here in
England I ever heard a case to equal it? If your sister had been
treated so!"

This is an atom: 
"It would have been impossible"

This is an atom: 
"I believe it. Her cautious nature would have trusted no man as I
trusted you. Her lips, doubtless, were never unfrozen till the
settlements had been signed. With her it was a matter of bargain,
not of love. I can well believe that."

This is an atom: 
"I will not talk about my sister."

This is an atom: 
"It seems to me, Lord Rufford, that you object to talk about
anything. You certainly have been very uncommunicative with
reference to yourself. Were you lying when you told me that you
loved me?"

This is an atom: 
"No."

This is an atom: 
"Did I lie when I told the Duchess that you had promised me your
love? Did I lie when I told my mother that in these days a man does
not always mention marriage when he asks a girl to be his wife? You
said you loved me, and I believed you, and the rest was a thing of
course. And you meant it. You know you meant it. When you held me
in your arms in the carriage you know you meant me to suppose that
it would always be so. Then the fear of your sister came upon you,
and of your sister's husband,--and you ran away! I wonder whether
you think yourself a man!" And yet she felt that she had not hit
him yet. He was wretched enough; and she could see that he was
wretched; but the wretchedness would pass away as soon as she was
gone. How could she stab him so that the wound would remain? With
what virus could she poison her arrow, so that the agony might be
prolonged. "And such a coward too! I began to suspect it when you
started that night from Mistletoe,--though I did not think then
that you could be all mean, all cowardly. From that day to this,
you have not dared to speak a word of truth. Every word has been a
falsehood."

This is an atom: 
"By heavens, no."

This is an atom: 
"Every word a falsehood! and I, a lady,--a lady whom you have so
deeply injured, whose cruel injury even you have not the face to
deny,--am forced by your cowardice to come to you here, because you
have not dared to come out to meet me. Is that true!"

This is an atom: 
"What good can it do?"

This is an atom: 
"None to me, God knows. You are such a thing that I would not have
you now I know you, though you were twice Lord Rufford. But I have
chosen to speak my mind to you and to tell you what I think. Did
you suppose that when I said I would meet you face to face I was to
be deterred by such girl's excuses as you made? I chose to tell you
to your face that you are false, a coward, and no gentleman, and
though you had hidden yourself under the very earth I would have
found you." Then she turned round and saw Sir George Penwether
standing close to them.

This is an atom: 
Lord Rufford had seen him approaching for some time, and had made
one or two futile attempts to meet him. Arabella's back had been
turned to the house, and she had not heard the steps or observed
the direction of her companion's eyes. He came so near before he
was seen that he heard her concluding words. Then Lord Rufford with
a ghastly attempt at pleasantry introduced them. "George," he said,
"I do not think you know Miss Trefoil. Sir George Penwether; Miss
Trefoil."

This is an atom: 
The interview had been watched from the house and the husband had
been sent down by his wife to mitigate the purgatory which she knew
that her brother must be enduring. "My wife," said Sir George, "has
sent me to ask Miss Trefoil whether she will not come into lunch."

This is an atom: 
"I believe it is Lord Rufford's house," said Arabella.

This is an atom: 
"If Miss Trefoil's frame of mind will allow her to sit at table
with me I shall be proud to see her," said Lord Rufford.

This is an atom: 
"Miss Trefoil's frame of mind will not allow her to eat or to drink
with such a dastard," said she turning away in the direction of the
park gates. "Perhaps, Sir George, you will be kind enough to direct
the man who brought me here to pick me up at the lodge." And so she
walked away--a mile across the park,--neither of them caring to
follow her.

This is an atom: 
It seemed to her as she stood at the lodge gate, having obstinately
refused to enter the house, to be an eternity before the fly came
to her. When it did come she felt as though her strength would
barely enable her to climb into it. And when she was there she
wept, with bitter throbbing woe, all the way to Rufford. It was
over now at any rate. Now there was not a possible chance on which
a gleam of hope might be made to settle. And how handsome he was,
and how beautiful the place, and how perfect would have been the
triumph could she have achieved it! One more word,--one other
pressure of the hand in the post-chaise might have done it! Had he
really promised her marriage she did not even now think that he
would have gone back from his word. If that heavy stupid duke would
have spoken to him that night at Mistletoe, all would have been
well! But now,--now there was nothing for her but weeping and
gnashing of teeth. He was gone, and poor Morton was gone; and all
those others, whose memories rose like ghosts before her;--they
were all gone. And she wept as she thought that she might perhaps
have made a better use of the gifts which Providence had put in her
way.

This is an atom: 
When Mounser Green met her at the station she was beyond measure
weary. Through the whole journey she had been struggling to
restrain her sobs so that her maid should neither hear nor see
them. "Don't mind me, Mr. Green; I am only tired,--so tired," she
said as she got into the carriage which he had brought.

This is an atom: 
He had with him a long, formal-looking letter addressed to herself.
But she was too weary to open it that night. It was the letter
conveying the tidings of the legacy which Morton had made in her
favour.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XIV

This is an atom: 
Lord Rufford's Model Farm

This is an atom: 
At this time Senator Gotobed was paying a second visit to Rufford
Hall. In the matter of Goarly and Scrobby he had never given way an
inch. He was still strongly of opinion that a gentleman's pheasants
had no right to eat his neighbour's corn, and that if damage were
admitted, the person committing the injury should not take upon
himself to assess the damage. He also thought,--and very often
declared his thoughts,--that Goarly was justified in shooting not
only foxes but hounds also when they came upon his property, and in
moments of excitement had gone so far as to say that not even
horses should be held sacred. He had, however, lately been driven
to admit that Goarly himself was not all that a man should be, and
that Mrs. Goarly's goose was an impostor. It was the theory,--the
principle for which he combated, declaring that the evil condition
of the man himself was due to the evil institutions among which he
had been reared. By degrees evidence had been obtained of Scrobby's
guilt in the matter of the red herrings, and he was to be tried for
the offence of putting down poison. Goarly was to be the principal
witness against his brother conspirator. Lord Rufford, instigated
by his brother-in-law, and liking the spirit of the man, had
invited the Senator to stay at the Hall while the case was being
tried at the Rufford Quarter Sessions. I am afraid the invitation
was given in a spirit of triumph over the Senator rather than with
genuine hospitality. It was thought well that the American should
be made to see in public the degradation of the abject creature
with whom he had sympathised. Perhaps there were some who thought
that in this way they would get the Senator's neck under their
heels. If there were such they were likely to be mistaken, as the
Senator was not a man prone to submit himself to such treatment.

This is an atom: 
He was seated at table with Lady Penwether and Miss Penge when Lord
Rufford and his brother-in-law came into the room, after parting
with Miss Trefoil in the manner described in the last chapter. Lady
Penwether had watched their unwelcome visitor as she took her way
across the park and had whispered something to Miss Penge. Miss
Penge understood the matter thoroughly, and would not herself have
made the slightest allusion to the other young lady. Had the
Senator not been there the two gentlemen would have been allowed to
take their places without a word on the subject. But the Senator
had a marvellous gift of saying awkward things and would never be
reticent. He stood for a while at the window in the drawing-room
before he went across the hall, and even took up a pair of
field-glasses to scrutinise the lady; and when they were all present
he asked whether that was not Miss Trefoil whom he had seen down by
the new fence. Lady Penwether, without seeming to look about her,
did look about her for a few seconds to see whether the question
might be allowed to die away unanswered. She perceived, from the
Senator's face, that he intended to have an answer.

This is an atom: 
"Yes," she said, "that was Miss Trefoil. I am very glad that she is
not coming in to disturb us."

This is an atom: 
"A great blessing," said Miss Penge.

This is an atom: 
"Where is she staying?" asked the Senator.

This is an atom: 
"I think she drove over from Rufford," said the elder lady.

This is an atom: 
"Poor young lady! She was engaged to marry my friend, Mr. John
Morton. She must have felt his death very bitterly. He was an
excellent young man; rather opinionated and perhaps too much wedded
to the traditions of his own country; but, nevertheless, a
painstaking, excellent young man. I had hoped to welcome her as
Mrs. Morton in America."

This is an atom: 
"He was to have gone to Patagonia," said Lord Rufford, endeavouring
to come to himself after the sufferings of the morning.

This is an atom: 
"We should have seen him back in Washington, Sir. Whenever you have
anything good in diplomacy you generally send him to us. Poor young
lady! Was she talking about him?"

This is an atom: 
"Not particularly," said his lordship.

This is an atom: 
"She must have remembered that when she was last here he was of the
party, and it was but a few weeks ago,--only a little before
Christmas. He struck me as being cold in his manner as an affianced
lover. Was not that your idea, Lady Penwether?"

This is an atom: 
"I don't think I observed him especially."

This is an atom: 
"I have reason to believe that he was much attached to her. She
could be sprightly enough; but at times there seemed to come a cold
melancholy upon her too. It is I fancy so with most of your English
ladies. Miss Trefoil always gave me the idea of being a good type
of the English aristocracy." Lady Penwether and Miss Penge drew
themselves up very stiffly. "You admired her, I think, my Lord."

This is an atom: 
"Very much indeed," said Lord Rufford, filling his mouth with
pigeon-pie as he spoke, and not lifting his eyes from his plate.

This is an atom: 
"Will she be back to dinner?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh dear no," said Lady Penwether. There was something in her tone
which at last startled the Senator into perceiving that Miss
Trefoil was not popular at Rufford Hall.

This is an atom: 
"She only came for a morning call," said Lord Rufford.

This is an atom: 
"Poor young woman. She has lost her husband, and, I am afraid, now
has lost her friends also. I am told that she is not well off;--and
from what I see and hear, I fancy that here in England a young lady
without a dowry cannot easily replace a lover. I suppose, too, Miss
Trefoil is not quite in her first youth."

This is an atom: 
"If you have done, Caroline," said Lady Penwether to Miss Penge, "I
think we'll go into the other room."

This is an atom: 
That afternoon Sir George asked the Senator to accompany him for a
walk. Sir George was held to be responsible for the Senator's
presence, and was told by the ladies that he must do something with
him. The next day, which was Friday, would be occupied by the
affairs of Scrobby and Goarly, and on the Saturday he was to return
to town. The two started about three with the object of walking
round the park and the home farm--the Senator intent on his duty of
examining the ways of English life to the very bottom. "I hope I
did not say anything amiss about Miss Trefoil," he remarked, as
they passed through a shrubbery gate into the park.

This is an atom: 
"No; I think not"

This is an atom: 
"I thought your good lady looked as though she did not like the
subject"

This is an atom: 
"I am not sure that Miss Trefoil is very popular with the ladies up
there."

This is an atom: 
"She's a handsome young woman and clever, though, as I said before,
given to melancholy, and sometimes fastidious. When we were all
here I thought that Lord Rufford admired her, and that poor Mr.
Morton was a little jealous."

This is an atom: 
"I wasn't at Rufford then. Here we get out of the park on to the
home farm. Rufford does it very well,--very well indeed."

This is an atom: 
"Looks after it altogether himself?"

This is an atom: 
"I cannot quite say that. He has a land-bailiff who lives in the
house there."

This is an atom: 
"With a salary?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh yes; 120 pounds a year I think the man has:"

This is an atom: 
"And that house?" asked the Senator. "Why, the house and garden are
worth 50 pounds a year."

This is an atom: 
"I dare say they are. Of course it costs money. It's near the park
and had to be made ornamental."

This is an atom: 
"And does it pay?"

This is an atom: 
"Well, no; I should think not. In point of fact I know it does not.
He loses about the value of the ground."

This is an atom: 
The Senator asked a great many more questions and then began his
lecture. "A man who goes into trade and loses by it, cannot be
doing good to himself or to others. You say, Sir George, that it is
a model farm;--but it's a model of ruin. If you want to teach a man
any other business, you don't specially select an example in which
the proprietors are spending all their capital without any return.
And if you would not do this in shoemaking, why in farming?"

This is an atom: 
"The neighbours are able to see how work should be done."

This is an atom: 
"Excuse me, Sir George, but it seems to me that they are enabled to
see how work should not be done. If his lordship would stick up
over his gate a notice to the effect that everything seen there was
to be avoided, he might do some service. If he would publish his
accounts half-yearly in the village newspaper--"

This is an atom: 
"There isn't a village newspaper."

This is an atom: 
"In the Rufford Gazette. There is a Rufford Gazette, and Rufford
isn't much more than a village. If he would publish his accounts
half-yearly in the Rufford Gazette, honestly showing how much he
had lost by his system, how much capital had been misapplied, and
how much labour wasted, he might serve as an example, like the
pictures of 'The Idle Apprentice.' I don't see that he can do any
other good,--unless it be to the estimable gentleman who is allowed
to occupy the pretty house. I don't think you'd see anything like
that model farm in our country, Sir."

This is an atom: 
"Your views, Mr. Gotobed, are utilitarian rather than picturesque."

This is an atom: 
"Oh!--if you say that it is done for the picturesque, that is
another thing. Lord Rufford is a wealthy lord, and can afford to be
picturesque. A green sward I should have thought handsomer, as well
as less expensive, than a ploughed field, but that is a matter of
taste. Only why call a pretty toy a model farm? You might mislead
the British rustics."

This is an atom: 
They had by this time passed through a couple of fields which
formed part of the model farm, and had come to a stile leading into
a large meadow. "This I take it," said the Senator looking about
him, "is beyond the limits of my Lord's plaything."

This is an atom: 
"This is Shugborough," said Sir George, "and there is John Runce,
the occupier, on his pony. He at any rate is a model farmer." As he
spoke Mr. Runce slowly trotted up to them touching his hat, and Mr.
Gotobed recognized the man who had declined to sit next to him at
the hunting breakfast. Runce also thought that he knew the
gentleman. "Do you hunt to-morrow, Mr. Runce?" asked Sir George.

This is an atom: 
"Well, Sir George, no; I think not. I b'lieve I must go to Rufford
and hear that fellow Scrobby get it hot and heavy."

This is an atom: 
"We seem all to be going that way. You think he'll be convicted,
Sir."

This is an atom: 
"If there's a juryman left in the country worth his salt, he'll be
convicted," said Mr. Runce, almost enraged at the doubt. "But that
other fellow; he's to get off. That's what kills me, Sir George."

This is an atom: 
"You're alluding to Mr. Goarly, Sir," said the Senator.

This is an atom: 
"That's about it, certainly," said Runce, still looking very
suspiciously at his companion.

This is an atom: 
"I almost think he is the bigger rogue of the two," said the
Senator.

This is an atom: 
"Well," said Runce; "well! I don't know as he ain't. Six of one and
half a dozen of the other! That's about it" But he was evidently
pacified by the opinion.

This is an atom: 
"Goarly is certainly a rascal all round," continued the Senator.
Runce looked at him to make sure whether he was the man who had
uttered such fearful blasphemies at the breakfast-table. "I think
we had a little discussion about this before, Mr. Runce."

This is an atom: 
"I am very glad to see you have changed your principles, Sir."

This is an atom: 
"Not a bit of it. I am too old to change my principles, Mr. Runce.
And much as I admire this country I don't think it's the place in
which I should be induced to do so." Runce looked at him again with
a scowl on his face and with a falling mouth. "Mr. Goarly is
certainly a blackguard."

This is an atom: 
"Well;--I rather think he is."

This is an atom: 
"But a blackguard may have a good cause. Put it in your own case,
Mr. Runce. If his Lordship's pheasants ate up your wheat--"

This is an atom: 
"They're welcome;--they're welcome! The more the merrier. But they
don't. Pheasants know when they're well off."

This is an atom: 
"Or if a crowd of horsemen rode over your fences, don't you
think--"

This is an atom: 
"My fences! They'd be welcome in my wife's bedroom if the fox took
that way. My fences! It's what I has fences for,--to be ridden
over."

This is an atom: 
"You didn't exactly hear what I have to say, Mr. Runce."

This is an atom: 
"And I don't want. No offence, sir, if you be a friend of my
Lord's; but if his Lordship was to say himself that Goarly was
right, I wouldn't listen to him. A good cause,--and he going about
at dead o' night with his pockets full of p'ison! Hounds and foxes
all one!--or little childer either for the matter o' that, if they
happened on the herrings!"

This is an atom: 
"I have not said his cause was good, Mr. Runce."

This is an atom: 
"I'll wish you good evening, Sir George," said the farmer, reining
his pony round. "Good evening to you, sir." And Mr. Runce trotted
or rather ambled off, unable to endure another word.

This is an atom: 
"An honest man, I dare say," said the Senator.

This is an atom: 
"Certainly; and not a bad specimen of a British farmer."

This is an atom: 
"Not a bad specimen of a Briton generally;--but still, perhaps, a
little unreasonable." After that Sir George said as little as he
could, till he had brought the Senator back to the hall.

This is an atom: 
"I think it's all over now," said Lady Penwether to Miss Penge,
when the gentlemen had left them alone in the afternoon.

This is an atom: 
"I'm sure I hope so,--for his sake. What a woman to come here by
herself, in that way!"

This is an atom: 
"I don't think he ever cared for her in the least."

This is an atom: 
"I can't say that I have troubled myself much about that," replied
Miss Penge. "For the sake of the family generally, and the
property, and all that, I should be very very sorry to think that
he was going to make her Lady Rufford. I dare say he has amused
himself with her."

This is an atom: 
"There was very little of that, as far as I can learn;--very little
encouragement indeed! What we saw here was the worst of it. He was
hardly with her at all at Mistletoe."

This is an atom: 
"I hope it will make him more cautious;--that's all," said Miss
Penge. Miss Penge was now a great heiress, having had her lawsuit
respecting certain shares in a Welsh coal-mine settled since we
last saw her. As all the world knows she came from one of the
oldest Commoner's families in the West of England, and is,
moreover, a handsome young woman, only twenty-seven years of age.
Lady Penwether thinks that she is the very woman to be mistress of
Rufford, and I do not know that Miss Penge herself is averse to the
idea. Lord Rufford has been too lately wounded to rise at the bait
quite immediately; but his sister knows that her brother is
impressionable and that a little patience will go a long way. They
have, however, all agreed at the hall that Arabella's name shall
not again be mentioned.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XV

This is an atom: 
Scrobby's Trial

This is an atom: 
Rufford was a good deal moved as to the trial of Mr Scrobby. Mr.
Scrobby was a man who not long since had held his head up in
Rufford and had the reputation of a well-to-do tradesman. Enemies
had perhaps doubted his probity; but he had gone on and prospered,
and, two or three years before the events which are now chronicled,
had retired on a competence. He had then taken a house with a few
acres of land, lying between Rufford and Rufford Hall, the property
of Lord Rufford, and had commenced genteel life. Many in the
neighbourhood had been astonished that such a man should have been
accepted as a tenant in such a house; and it was generally
understood that Lord Rufford himself had been very angry with his
agent. Mr. Scrobby did not prosper greatly in his new career. He
became a guardian of the poor and quarrelled with all the Board. He
tried to become a municipal counsellor in the borough, but failed.
Then he quarrelled with his landlord, insisted on making changes in
the grounds which were not authorised by the terms of his holding,
would not pay his rent, and was at last ejected,--having caused
some considerable amount of trouble. Then he occupied a portion of
his leisure with spreading calumnies as to his Lordship and was
generally understood to have made up his mind to be disagreeable.
As Lord Rufford was a sportsman rather than anything else Scrobby
studied how he might best give annoyance in that direction, and
some time before the Goarly affair had succeeded in creating
considerable disturbance. When a man will do this pertinaciously,
and when his selected enemy is wealthy and of high standing, he
will generally succeed in getting a party round him. In Rufford
there were not a few who thought that Lord Rufford's pheasants and
foxes were a nuisance,--though probably these persons had never
suffered in any way themselves. It was a grand thing to fight a
lord,--and so Scrobby had a party.

This is an atom: 
When the action against his Lordship was first threatened by
Goarly, and when it was understood that Scrobby had backed him with
money there was a feeling that Scrobby was doing rather a fine
thing. He had not, indeed, used his money openly, as the Senator
had afterwards done; but that was not Scrobby's way. If Goarly had
been ill-used any help was legitimate, and the party as a party was
proud of their man. But when it came to pass that poison had been
laid down, "wholesale" as the hunting men said, in Dillsborough
Wood, in the close vicinity of Goarly's house, then the party
hesitated. Such strategy as that was disgusting;--but was there
reason to think that Scrobby had been concerned in the matter?
Scrobby still had an income, and ate roast meat or boiled every day
for his dinner. Was it likely that such a man should deal in
herrings and strychnine?

This is an atom: 
Nickem had been at work for the last three months, backed up by
funds which had latterly been provided by the Lord's agent, and had
in truth run the matter down. Nickem had found out all about it,
and in his pride had resigned his stool in Mr. Master's office. But
the Scrobby party in Rufford could not bring itself to believe that
Nickem was correct. That Goarly's hand had actually placed the
herrings no man either at Rufford or Dillsborough had doubted. Such
was now Nickem's story. But of what avail would be the evidence of
such a man as Goarly against such a man as Scrobby? It would be
utterly worthless unless corroborated, and the Scrobby party was
not yet aware how clever Nickem had been. Thus all Rufford was
interested in the case.

This is an atom: 
Lord Rufford, Sir George Penwether, his Lordship's agent, and Mr.
Gotobed, had been summoned as witnesses,--the expenditure of money
by the Senator having by this time become notorious; and on the
morning of the trial they all went into the town in his Lordship's
drag. The Senator, as the guest, was on the box-seat with his
Lordship, and as they passed old Runce trotting into Rufford on his
nag, Mr. Gotobed began to tell the story of yesterday's meeting,
complaining of the absurdity of the old farmer's anger.

This is an atom: 
"Penwether told me about it," said the Lord.

This is an atom: 
"I suppose your tenant is a little crazy."

This is an atom: 
"By no means. I thought he was right in what he said, if I
understood Penwether."

This is an atom: 
"He couldn't have been right. He turned from me in disgust simply
because I tried to explain to him that a rogue has as much right to
be defended by the law as an honest man."

This is an atom: 
"Runce looks upon these men as vermin which ought to be hunted
down."

This is an atom: 
"But they are not vermin. They are men; and till they have been
found guilty they are innocent men."

This is an atom: 
"If a man had murdered your child, would he be innocent in your
eyes till he was convicted?"

This is an atom: 
"I hope so;--but I should be very anxious to bring home the crime
against him. And should he be found guilty even then he should not
be made subject to other punishment than that the law awards. Mr.
Runce is angry with me because I do not think that Goarly should be
crushed under the heels of all his neighbours. Take care, my Lord.
Didn't we come round that corner rather sharp?"

This is an atom: 
Then Lord Rufford emphatically declared that such men as Scrobby
and Goarly should be crushed, and the Senator, with an inward sigh
declared that between landlord and tenant, between peer and farmer,
between legislator and rustic, there was, in capacity for logical
inference, no difference whatever. The British heart might be all
right; but the British head was,--ah, hopelessly wooden! It would
be his duty to say so in his lecture, and perhaps some good might
be done to so gracious but so stolid a people, if only they could
be got to listen.

This is an atom: 
Scrobby had got down a barrister from London, and therefore the
case was allowed to drag itself out through the whole day. Lord
Rufford, as a magistrate, went on to the bench himself, though he
explained that he only took his seat there as a spectator. Sir
George and Mr. Gotobed were also allowed to sit in the high
place,--though the Senator complained even of this. Goarly and
Scrobby were not allowed to be there, and Lord Rufford, in his
opinion, should also have been debarred from such a privilege. A
long time was occupied before even a jury could be sworn, the
barrister earning his money by browbeating the provincial bench and
putting various obstacles in the way of the trial. As he was used
to practice at the assizes of course he was able to domineer. This
juror would not do, nor that. The chairman was all wrong in his
law. The officers of the Court knew nothing about it. At first
there was quite a triumph for the Scrobbyites, and even Nickem
himself was frightened. But at last the real case was allowed to
begin, and Goarly was soon in the witness-box. Goarly did not seem
to enjoy the day, and was with difficulty got to tell his own story
even on his own side. But the story when it was told was simple
enough. He had met Mr. Scrobby accidentally in Rufford and they two
had together discussed the affairs of the young Lord. They came to
an agreement that the young Lord was a tyrant and ought to be put
down, and Scrobby showed how it was to be done. Scrobby instigated
the action about the pheasants, and undertook to pay the expenses
if Goarly would act in the other little matter. But, when he found
that the Senator's money was forthcoming, he had been anything but
as good as his word. Goarly swore that in hard cash he had never
seen more than four shillings of Scrobby's money. As to the poison,
Goarly declared that he knew nothing about it; but he certainly had
received a parcel of herrings from Scrobby's own hands, and in
obedience to Scrobby's directions, had laid them down in
Dillsborough Wood the very morning on which the hounds had come
there. He owned that he supposed that there might be something in
the herrings, something that would probably be deleterious to
hounds as well as foxes,--or to children should the herrings happen
to fall into children's hands; but he assured the Court that he had
no knowledge of poison,--none whatever. Then he was made by the
other side to give a complete and a somewhat prolonged account of
his own life up to the present time, this information being of
course required by the learned barrister on the other side; in
listening to which the Senator did become thoroughly ashamed of the
Briton whom he had assisted with his generosity.

This is an atom: 
But all this would have been nothing had not Nickem secured the old
woman who had sold the herrings,--and also the chemist, from whom
the strychnine had been purchased as much as three years
previously. This latter feat was Nickem's great triumph, the
feeling of the glory of which induced him to throw up his
employment in Mr. Masters' office, and thus brought him and his
family to absolute ruin within a few months in spite of the liberal
answers which were made by Lord Rufford to many of his numerous
appeals. Away in Norrington the poison had been purchased as much
as three years ago, and yet Nickem had had the luck to find it out.
When the Scrobbyites heard that Scrobby had gone all the way to
Norrington to buy strychnine to kill rats they were Scrobbyites no
longer. "I hope they'll hang 'un. I do hope they'll hang 'un," said
Mr. Runce quite out loud from his crowded seat just behind the
attorney's bench.

This is an atom: 
The barrister of course struggled hard to earn his money. Though he
could not save his client he might annoy the other side. He
insisted therefore on bringing the whole affair of the pheasants
before the Court, and examined the Senator at great length. He
asked the Senator whether he had not found himself compelled to
sympathise with the wrongs he had witnessed. The Senator declared
that he had witnessed no wrongs. Why then had he interfered?
Because he had thought that there might be wrong, and because he
wished to see what power a poor man in this country would have
against a rich one. He was induced still to think that Goarly had
been ill-treated about the pheasants;--but he could not take upon
himself to say that he had witnessed any wrong done. But he was
quite sure that the system on which such things were managed in
England was at variance with that even justice which prevailed in
his own country! Yes;--by his own country he did mean Mickewa. He
could tell that learned gentleman in spite of his sneers, and in
spite of his evident ignorance of geography, that nowhere on the
earth's surface was justice more purely administered than in the
great Western State of Mickewa. It was felt by everybody that the
Senator had the best of it. Mr. Scrobby was sent into durance for
twelve months with hard labour, and Goarly was conveyed away in the
custody of the police lest he should be torn to pieces by the rough
lovers of hunting who were congregated outside. When the sentence
had reached Mr. Runce's ears, and had been twice explained to him,
first by one neighbour and then by another, his face assumed the
very look which it had worn when he carried away his victuals from
the Senator's side at Rufford Hall, and when he had turned his pony
round on his own land on the previous evening. The man had killed a
fox and might have killed a dozen hounds, and was to be locked up
only for twelve months! He indignantly asked his neighbour what had
come of Van Diemen's land, and what was the use of Botany Bay.

This is an atom: 
On their way back to Rufford Hall, Lord Rufford would have been
triumphant, had not the Senator checked him. "It's a bad state of
things altogether," he said. "Of course the promiscuous use of
strychnine is objectionable."

This is an atom: 
"Rather," said his Lordship.

This is an atom: 
"But is it odd that an utterly uneducated man, one whom his country
has left to grow up in the ignorance of a brute, should have
recourse to any measure, however objectionable, when the law will
absolutely give him no redress against the trespass made by a
couple of hundred horsemen?" Lord Rufford gave it up, feeling the
Senator to be a man with whom he could not argue.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XVI

This is an atom: 
At Last

This is an atom: 
When once Mrs. Morton had taken her departure for London, on the
day after her grandson's death, nothing further was heard of her at
Bragton. She locked up everything and took all the keys away, as
though still hoping,--against hope,--that the will might turn out
to be other than she expected. But when the lawyer came down to
read the document he brought the keys back with him, and no further
tidings reached Dillsborough respecting the old woman. She still
drew her income as she had done for half a century, but never even
came to look at the stone which Reginald put up on the walls of
Bragton church to perpetuate the memory of his cousin. What moans
she made she made in silent obscurity, and devoted the remainder of
her years to putting together money for members of her own family
who took no notice of her.

This is an atom: 
After the funeral, Lady Ushant returned to the house at the request
of her nephew, who declared his purpose of remaining at Hoppet Hall
for the present. She expostulated with him and received from him an
assurance that he would take up his residence as squire at Bragton
as soon as he married a wife,--should he ever do so. In the
meantime he could, he thought, perform his duties from Hoppet Hall
as well as on the spot. As a residence for a bachelor he preferred,
he said, Hoppet Hall to the park. Lady Ushant yielded and returned
once again to her old home, the house in which she had been born,--
and gave up her lodgings at Cheltenham. The word that he said about
his possible marriage set her mind at work, and induced her to put
sundry questions to him. "Of course you will marry?" she said.

This is an atom: 
"Men who have property to leave behind them usually do marry, and
as I am not wiser than others, I probably may do so. But I will not
admit that it is a matter of course. I may escape yet"

This is an atom: 
"I do hope you will marry. I hope it may be before I die, so that I
may see her."

This is an atom: 
"And disapprove of her, ten to one."

This is an atom: 
"Certainly I shall not if you tell me that you love her."

This is an atom: 
"Then I will tell you so, to prevent disagreeable results."

This is an atom: 
"I am quite sure there must be somebody that you like, Reginald,"
she said after a pause.

This is an atom: 
"Are you? I don't know that I have shown any very strong
preference. I am not disposed to praise myself for many things, but
I really do think that I have been as undemonstrative as most men
of my age."

This is an atom: 
"Still I did hope--"

This is an atom: 
"What did you hope?"

This is an atom: 
"I won't mention any name. I don't think it is right. I have
observed that more harm than good comes of such talking, and I have
determined always to avoid it. But--" Then there was another pause.
"Remember how old I am, Reginald, and when it is to be done give me
at any rate the pleasure of knowing it" Of course he knew to whom
she alluded, and of course he laughed at her feeble caution. But he
would not say a word to encourage her to mention the name of Mary
Masters. He thought that he was sure that were the girl free he
would now ask her to be his wife. If he loved any one it was her.
If he had ever known a woman with whom he thought it would be
pleasant to share the joy and labours of life, it was Mary Masters.
If he could imagine that any one constant companion would be a joy
to him, she would be that person. But he had been distinctly
informed that she was in love with some one, and not for worlds
would he ask for that which had been given to another. And not for
worlds would he hazard the chance of a refusal. He thought that he
could understand the delight, that he could thoroughly enjoy the
rapture, of hearing her whisper with downcast eyes, that she could
love him. He had imagination enough to build castles in the air in
which she reigned as princess, in which she would lie with her head
upon his bosom and tell him that he was her chosen prince. But he
would, hardly know how to bear himself should he ask in vain. He
believed he could love as well as Lawrence Twentyman, but he was
sure that he could not continue his quest as that young man had
done.

This is an atom: 
When Lady Ushant had been a day or two at the house she asked him
whether she might invite Mary there as her guest;--as her perpetual
guest. "I have no objection in life," he said; "but take care that
you don't interfere with her happiness."

This is an atom: 
"Because of her father and sisters?" suggested the innocent old
lady.

This is an atom: 
"'Has she a father, has she a mother;
     Or has she a dearer one still than all other?'"

This is an atom: 
said Reginald laughing.

This is an atom: 
"Perhaps she has."

This is an atom: 
"Then don't interfere with her happiness in that direction. How is
she to have a lover come to see her out here?"

This is an atom: 
"Why not? I don't see why she shouldn't have a lover here as well
as in Dillsborough. I don't object to lovers, if they are of the
proper sort; and I am sure Mary wouldn't have anything else."
Reginald told her she might do as she pleased and made no further
inquiry as to Mary's lovers.

This is an atom: 
A few days afterwards Mary went with her boxes to Bragton,--Mrs.
Masters repeating her objections, but repeating them with but
little energy. Just at this time a stroke of good fortune befell
the Masters family generally which greatly reduced her power over
her husband. Reginald Morton had spent an hour in the attorney's
office, and had declared his purpose of restoring Mr. Masters to
his old family position in regard to the Bragton estate. When she
heard it she felt at once that her dominion was gone. She had based
everything on the growing inferiority of her husband's position,
and now he was about to have all his glory back again! She had
inveighed against gentlemen from the day of her marriage,--and here
he was, again to be immersed up to his eyes in the affairs of a
gentleman. And then she had been so wrong about Goarly, and Lord
Rufford had been so much better a client! And ready money had been
so much more plentiful of late, owing to poor John Morton's
ready-handed honesty! She had very little to say about it when Mary
packed her boxes and was taken in Mr. Runciman's fly to Bragton.

This is an atom: 
Since the old days, the old days of all, since the days to which
Reginald had referred when he asked her to pass over the bridge with
him, she had never yet walked about the Bragton grounds. She had often
been to the house, visiting Lady Ushant; but she had simply gone
thither and returned. And indeed, when the house had been empty, the
walk from Dillsborough to the bridge and back had been sufficient
exercise for herself and her sisters. But now she could go whither she
listed and bring her memory to all the old spots. With the tenacity as
to household matters which characterised the ladies of the country some
years since, Lady Ushant employed all her mornings and those of her
young friend in making inventories of everything that was found in the
house; but her afternoons were her own, and she wandered about with a
freedom she had never known before. At this time Reginald Morton was up
in London and had been away nearly a week. He had gone intending to be
absent for some undefined time, so that Lady Ushant and Mrs. Hopkins
were free from all interruption. It was as yet only the middle of March
and the lion had not altogether disappeared; but still Mary could get
out. She did not care much for the wind; and she roamed about among the
leafless shrubberies, thinking,-- probably not of many things,--meaning
always to think of the past, but unable to keep her mind from the
future, the future which would so soon be the present. How long would
it be before the coming of that stately dame? Was he in quest of her
now? Had he perhaps postponed his demand upon her till fortune had made
him rich? Of course she had no right to be sorry that he had inherited
the property which had been his almost of right; but yet, had it been
otherwise, might she not have had some chance? But, oh, if he had said
a word to her, only a word more than he had spoken already,--a word
that might have sounded like encouragement to others beside herself,
and then have been obliged to draw back because of the duty which he
owed to the property, how much worse would that have been! She did own
to herself that the squire of Bragton should not look for his wife in
the house of a Dillsborough attorney. As she thought of this a tear ran
down her cheek and trickled down on to the wooden rail of the little
bridge.

This is an atom: 
"There's no one to give you an excuse now, and you must come and
walk round with me," said a voice, close to her ear.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Mr. Morton, how you have startled me!"

This is an atom: 
"Is there anything the matter, Mary?" said he, looking up into her
face.

This is an atom: 
"Only you have startled me so."

This is an atom: 
"Has that brought tears into your eyes."

This is an atom: 
"Well,--I suppose so," she said trying to smile. "You were so very
quiet and I thought you were in London."

This is an atom: 
"So I was this morning, and now I am here. But something else has
made you unhappy."

This is an atom: 
"No; nothing."

This is an atom: 
"I wish we could be friends, Mary. I wish I could know your secret.
You have a secret."

This is an atom: 
"No," she said boldly.

This is an atom: 
"Is there nothing?"

This is an atom: 
"What should there be, Mr. Morton!"

This is an atom: 
"Tell me why you were crying."

This is an atom: 
"I was not crying. Just a tear is not crying. Sometimes one does
get melancholy. One can't cry when there is any one to look, and so
one does it alone. I'd have been laughing if I knew that you were
coming."

This is an atom: 
"Come round by the kennels. You can get over the wall;--can't you?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh yes."

This is an atom: 
"And we'll go down the old orchard, and get out by the corner of
the park fence." Then he walked and she followed him, hardly
keeping close by his side, and thinking as she went how foolish she
had been not to have avoided the perils and fresh troubles of such
a walk. When he was helping her over the wall he held her hands for
a moment and she was aware of unusual pressure. It was the pressure
of love,--or of that pretence of love which young men, and perhaps
old men, sometimes permit themselves to affect. In an ordinary way
Mary would have thought as little of it as another girl. She might
feel dislike to the man, but the affair would be too light for
resentment. With this man it was different. He certainly was not
justified in making the slightest expression of factitious
affection. He at any rate should have felt himself bound to abstain
from any touch of peculiar tenderness. She would not say a word.
She would not even look at him with angry eyes. But she twitched
both her hands away from him as she sprang to the ground. Then
there was a passage across the orchard,--not more than a hundred
yards, and after that a stile. At the stile she insisted on using
her own hand for the custody of her dress. She would not even touch
his outstretched arm. "You are very independent," he said.

This is an atom: 
"I have to be so."

This is an atom: 
"I cannot make you out, Mary. I wonder whether there is still
anything rankling in your bosom against me."

This is an atom: 
"Oh dear no. What should rankle with me?"

This is an atom: 
"What indeed;--unless you resent my--regard."

This is an atom: 
"I am not so rich in friends as to do that, Mr. Morton."

This is an atom: 
"I don't suppose there can be many people who have the same sort of
feeling for you that I have."

This is an atom: 
"There are not many who have known me so long, certainly."

This is an atom: 
"You have some friend, I know," he said.

This is an atom: 
"More than one I hope."

This is an atom: 
"Some special friend. Who is he, Mary?"

This is an atom: 
"I don't know what you mean, Mr. Morton" She then thought that he
was still alluding to Lawrence Twentyman.

This is an atom: 
"Tell me, Mary."

This is an atom: 
"What am I to tell you?"

This is an atom: 
"Your father says that there is some one."

This is an atom: 
"Papa!"

This is an atom: 
"Yes;--your father."

This is an atom: 
Then she remembered it all;--how she had been driven into a half
confession to her father. She could not say there was nobody. She
certainly could not say who that some one was. She could not be
silent, for by silence she would be confessing a passion for some
other man,--a passion which certainly had no existence. "I don't
know why papa should talk about me," she said, "and I certainly
don't know why you should repeat what he said."

This is an atom: 
"But there is some one?" She clenched her fist, and hit out at the
air with her parasol, and knit her brows as she looked up at him
with a glance of fire in her eye which he had never seen there
before. "Believe me, Mary," he said; "if ever a girl had a sincere
friend, you have one in me. I would not tease you by impertinence
in such a matter. I will be as faithful to you as the sun. Do you
love any one?"

This is an atom: 
"Yes," she said turning round at him with ferocity and shouting out
her answer as she pressed on.

This is an atom: 
"Who is he, Mary?"

This is an atom: 
"What right have you to ask me? What right can any one have? Even
your aunt would not press me as you are doing."

This is an atom: 
"My aunt could not have the same interest. Who is he, Mary?"

This is an atom: 
"I will not tell you."

This is an atom: 
He paused a few moments and walked on a step or two before he spoke
again. "I would it were I," he said.

This is an atom: 
"What!" she ejaculated.

This is an atom: 
"I would it were I," he repeated.

This is an atom: 
One glance of her eye stole itself round into his face, and then
her face was turned quickly to the ground. Her parasol which had
been raised drooped listless from her hand. All unconsciously she
hastened her steps and became aware that the tears were streaming
from her eyes. For a moment or two it seemed to her that all was
still hopeless. If he had no more to say than that, certainly she
had not a word. He had made her no tender of his love. He had not
told her that in very truth she was his chosen one. After all she
was not sure that she understood the meaning of those words "I
would it were I" But the tears were coming so quick that she could
see nothing of the things around her, and she did not dare even to
put her hand up to her eyes. If he wanted her love,--if it was
possible that he really wished for it,--why did he not ask for it?
She felt his footsteps close to hers, and she was tempted to walk
on quicker even than before. Then there came the fingers of a hand
round her waist, stealing gradually on till she felt the pressure
of his body on her shoulders. She put her hand up weakly, to push
back the intruding fingers,--only to leave it tight in his grasp.
Then,--then was the first moment in which she realized the truth.
After all he did love her. Surely he would not hold her there
unless he meant her to know that he loved her. "Mary," he said. To
speak was impossible, but she turned round and looked at him with
imploring eyes. "Mary,--say that you will be my wife."

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XVII

This is an atom: 
"My own, own Husband"

This is an atom: 
Yes;--it had come at last. As one may imagine to be the certainty
of paradise to the doubting, fearful, all but despairing soul when
it has passed through the gates of death and found in new worlds a
reality of assured bliss, so was the assurance to her, conveyed by
that simple request, "Mary, say that you will be my wife." It did
not seem to her that any answer was necessary. Will it be required
that the spirit shall assent to its entrance into Elysium? Was
there room for doubt? He would never go back from his word now. He
would not have spoken the word had he not been quite, quite
certain. And he had loved her all that time, when she was so hard
to him! It must have been so. He had loved her, this bright one,
even when he thought that she was to be given to that clay-bound
rustic lover! Perhaps that was the sweetest of it all, though in
draining the sweet draught she had to accuse herself of hardness,
blindness and injustice. Could it be real? Was it true that she had
her foot firmly placed in Paradise? He was there, close to her,
with his arm still round her, and her fingers grasped within his.
The word wife was still in her ears,--surely the sweetest word in
all the language! What protestation of love could have been so
eloquent as that question? "Will you be my wife?" No true man, she
thought, ever ought to ask the question in any other form. But her
eyes were still full of tears, and as she went she knew not where
she was going. She had forgotten all her surroundings, being only
aware that he was with her, and that no other eyes were on them.

This is an atom: 
Then there was another stile on reaching which he withdrew his arm
and stood facing her with his back leaning against it. "Why do you
weep?" he said;--"and, Mary, why do you not answer my question? If
there be anybody else you must tell me now."

This is an atom: 
"There is nobody else," she said almost angrily. "There never was.
There never could be."

This is an atom: 
"And yet there was somebody!" She pouted her lips at him, glancing
up into his face for half a second, and then again hung her head
down. "Mary, do not grudge me my delight"

This is an atom: 
"No;--no;--no!"

This is an atom: 
"But you do."

This is an atom: 
"No. If there can be delight to you in so poor a thing, have it
all."

This is an atom: 
"Then you must kiss me, dear." She gently came to him,--oh so
gently,--and with her head still hanging, creeping towards his
shoulder, thinking perhaps that the motion should have been his,
but still obeying him, and then, leaning against him, seemed as
though she would stoop with her lips to his hand. But this he did
not endure. Seizing her quickly in his arms he drew her up, till
her not unwilling face was close to his, and there he kept her till
she was almost frightened by his violence. "And now, Mary, what do
you say to my question? It has to be answered."

This is an atom: 
"You know."

This is an atom: 
"But that will not do, I will have it in words. I will not be shorn
of my delight"

This is an atom: 
That it should be a delight to him, was the very essence of her
heaven. "Tell me what to say," she answered. "How may I say it
best?"

This is an atom: 
"Reginald Morton," he began.

This is an atom: 
"Reginald," she repeated it after him, but went no farther in
naming him.

This is an atom: 
"Because I love you better than in the world--"

This is an atom: 
"I do."

This is an atom: 
"Ah, but say it"

This is an atom: 
"Because I love you, oh, so much better than all the world
besides."

This is an atom: 
"Therefore, my own, own husband--"

This is an atom: 
"Therefore, my own, own--," Then she paused.

This is an atom: 
"Say the word"

This is an atom: 
"My own, own husband."

This is an atom: 
"I will be your true wife"

This is an atom: 
"I will be your own true loving wife." Then he kissed her again.

This is an atom: 
"That," he said, "is our little marriage ceremony under God's sky,
and no other can be more binding. As soon as you, in the plentitude
of your maiden power, will fix a day for the other one, and when we
can get that over, then we will begin our little journey together."

This is an atom: 
"But Reginald!"

This is an atom: 
"Well, dear!"

This is an atom: 
"You haven't said anything."

This is an atom: 
"Haven't I? I thought I had said it all."

This is an atom: 
"But you haven't said it for yourself!"

This is an atom: 
"You say what you want,--and I'll repeat it quite as well as you
did."

This is an atom: 
"I can't do that. Say it yourself."

This is an atom: 
"I will be your true husband for the rest of the journey;--by which
I mean it to be understood that I take you into partnership on
equal terms, but that I am to be allowed to manage the business
just as I please."

This is an atom: 
"Yes;--that you shall," she said, quite in earnest.

This is an atom: 
"Only as you are practical and I am vague, I don't doubt that
everything will fall into your hands before five years are over,
and that I shall have to be told whether I can afford to buy a new
book, and when I am to ask all the gentry to dinner."

This is an atom: 
"Now you are laughing at me because I shall know so little about
anything."

This is an atom: 
"Come, dear; let us get over the stile and go on for another field,
or we shall never get round the park." Then she jumped over after
him, just touching his hand. "I was not laughing at you at all. I
don't in the least doubt that in a very little time you will know
everything about everything."

This is an atom: 
"I am so much afraid."

This is an atom: 
"You needn't be. I know you well enough for that. But suppose I had
taken such a one as that young woman who was here with my poor
cousin. Oh, heavens!"

This is an atom: 
"Perhaps you ought to have done so."

This is an atom: 
"I thank the Lord that hath delivered me."

This is an atom: 
"You ought,--you ought to have chosen some lady of high standing,"
said Mary, thinking with ineffable joy of the stately dame who was
not to come to Bragton. "Do you know what I was thinking only the
other day about it?--that you had gone up to London to look for
some proper sort of person."

This is an atom: 
"And how did you mean to receive her?"

This is an atom: 
"I shouldn't have received her at all. I should have gone away. You
can't do it now."

This is an atom: 
"Can't I?"

This is an atom: 
"What were you thanking the Lord for so heartily?"

This is an atom: 
"For you."

This is an atom: 
"Were you? That is the sweetest thing you have said yet. My own;--
my darling;--my dearest! If only I can so live that you may be able
to thank the Lord for me in years to come!"

This is an atom: 
I will not trouble the reader with all that was said at every
stile. No doubt very much of what has been told was repeated again
and again so that the walk round the park was abnormally long. At
last, however, they reached the house, and as they entered the
hall, Mary whispered to him, "Who is to tell your aunt?" she said.

This is an atom: 
"Come along," he replied striding upstairs to his aunt's bedroom,
where he knew she would be at this time. He opened the door without
any notice and, having waited till Mary had joined him, led her
forcibly into the middle of the room. "Here she is," he said; "my
wife elect"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Reginald!"

This is an atom: 
"We have managed it all, and there needn't be any more said about
it except to settle the day. Mary has been looking about the house
and learning her duty already. She'll be able to have every
bedstead and every chair by heart, which is an advantage ladies
seldom possess. Then Mary rushed forward and was received into the
old woman's arms.

This is an atom: 
When Reginald left them, which he did very soon after the
announcement was made, Lady Ushant had a great deal to say. "I have
been thinking of it, my dear,--oh,--for years;--ever since he came
to Hoppet Hall. But I am sure the best way is never to say
anything. If I had interfered there is no knowing how it might have
been."

This is an atom: 
"Then, dear Lady Ushant, I am so glad you didn't," said Mary,--
being tolerably sure at the same time within her own bosom that her
loving old friend could have done no harm in that direction. "I
wouldn't say a word though I was always thinking of it. But then he
is so odd, and no one can know what he means sometimes. That's what
made me think when Mr. Twentyman was so very pressing--"

This is an atom: 
"That couldn't--couldn't have been possible."

This is an atom: 
"Poor young man!"

This is an atom: 
"But I always told him it was impossible."

This is an atom: 
"I wonder whether you cared about Reginald all that time." In
answer to this Mary only hid her face in the old woman's lap. "Dear
me! I suppose you did all along. But I am sure it was better not to
say anything, and now what will your papa and mamma say?"

This is an atom: 
"They'll hardly believe it at first"

This is an atom: 
"I hope they'll be glad."

This is an atom: 
"Glad! Why what do you suppose they would want me to do? Dear papa!
And dear mamma too, because she has really been good to me. I
wonder when it must be?" Then that question was discussed at great
length, and Lady Ushant had a great deal of very good advice to
bestow. She didn't like long engagements, and it was very essential
for Reginald's welfare that he should settle himself at Bragton as
soon as possible. Mary's pleas for a long day were not very urgent.

This is an atom: 
That evening at Bragton was rather long and rather dull. It was
almost the first that she had ever passed in company with Reginald,
and there now seemed to be a necessity of doing something peculiar,
whereas there was nothing peculiar to be done. It was his custom to
betake himself to his books after dinner; but he could hardly do so
with ease in company with the girl who had just promised him to be
his wife. Lady Ushant too wished to show her extreme joy, and made
flattering but vain attempts to be ecstatic. Mary, to tell the
truth, was longing for solitude, feeling that she could not yet
realise her happiness.

This is an atom: 
Not even when she was in bed could she reduce her mind to order. It
would have been all but impossible even had he remained the
comparative humble lord of Hoppet Hall;--but that the squire of
Bragton should be her promised husband was a marvel so great that
from every short slumber, she waked with fear of treacherous
dreams. A minute's sleep might rob her of her joy and declare to
her in the moment of waking that it was all an hallucination. It
was not that he was dearer to her, or that her condition was the
happier, because of his position and wealth; but that the chance of
his inheritance had lifted him so infinitely above her! She thought
of the little room at home which she generally shared with one of
her sisters, of her all too scanty wardrobe, of her daily tasks
about the house, of her stepmother's late severity, and of her
father's cares. Surely he would not hinder her from being good to
them; surely he would let the young girls come to her from time to
time! What an added happiness it would be if he would allow her to
pass on to them some sparks of the prosperity which he was
bestowing on her. And then her thoughts travelled on to poor Larry.
Would he not be more contented now;--now, when he would be certain
that no further frantic efforts could avail him anything. Poor
Larry! Would Reginald permit her to regard him as a friend? And
would he submit to friendly treatment? She could look forward and
see him happy with his wife, the best loved of their neighbours;--
for who was there in the world better than Larry? But she did not
know how two men who had both been her lovers, would allow
themselves to be brought together. But, oh, what peril had been
there! It was but the other day she had striven so hard to give the
lie to her love and to become Larry's wife. She shuddered beneath
the bedclothes as she thought of the danger she had run. One word
would have changed all her Paradise into a perpetual wail of tears
and waste of desolation. When she woke in the morning from her long
sleep an effort was wanting to tell her that it was all true. Oh,
if it had slipped from her then;--if she had waked after such a
dream to find herself loving in despair with a sore bosom and angry
heart!

This is an atom: 
She met him downstairs, early, in the study, having her first
request to make to him. Might she go in at once after breakfast and
tell them all? "I suppose I ought to go to your father," he said.
"Let me go first," she pleaded, hanging on his arm. "I would not
think that I was not mindful of them from the very beginning." So
she was driven into Dillsborough in the pony carriage which had
been provided for old Mrs. Morton's use, and told her own story.
"Papa," she said, going to the office door. "Come into the house;--
come at once." And then, within her father's arms, while her
stepmother listened, she told them of her triumph. "Mr. Reginald
Morton wants me to be his wife, and he is coming here to ask you."

This is an atom: 
"The Lord in heaven be good to us," said Mrs. Masters, holding up
both her hands. "Is it true, child?"

This is an atom: 
"The squire!"

This is an atom: 
"It is true, papa,--and,--and-"

This is an atom: 
"And what, my love?"

This is an atom: 
"When he comes to you, you must say I will be."

This is an atom: 
There was not much danger on that score. "Was it he that you told
me of?" said the attorney. To this she only nodded her assent. "It
was Reginald Morton all the time? Well!"

This is an atom: 
"Why shouldn't it be he?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh no, my dear! You are a most fortunate girl,--most fortunate!
But somehow I never thought of it, that a child of mine should come
to live at Bragton and have it, one may say, partly as her own! It
is odd after all that has come and gone. God bless you, my dear,
and make you happy. You are a very fortunate child."

This is an atom: 
Mrs. Masters was quite overpowered. She had thrown herself on to
the old family sofa, and was fanning herself with her handkerchief.
She had been wrong throughout, and was now completely humiliated by
the family success; and yet she was delighted, though she did not
dare to be triumphant. She had so often asked both father and
daughter what good gentlemen would do to either of them; and now
the girl was engaged to marry the richest gentleman in the
neighbourhood! In any expression of joy she would be driven to
confess how wrong she had always been. How often had she asked what
would come of Ushanting. This it was that had come of Ushanting.
The girl had been made fit to be the companion of such a one as
Reginald Morton, and had now fallen into the position which was
suited to her. "Of course we shall see nothing of you now," she
said in a whimpering voice. It was not a gracious speech, but it
was almost justified by disappointments.

This is an atom: 
"Mamma, you know that I shall never separate myself from you and
the girls."

This is an atom: 
"Poor Larry!" said the woman sobbing. "Of course it is all for the
best; but I don't know what he'll do now."

This is an atom: 
"You must tell him, papa," said Mary; "and give him my love and bid
him be a man."

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XVIII

This is an atom: 
"Bid him be a Man"

This is an atom: 
"The little phaeton remained in Dillsborough to take Mary back to
Bragton. As soon as she was gone the attorney went over to the Bush
with the purpose of borrowing Runciman's pony, so that he might
ride over to Chowton Farm and at once execute his daughter's last
request. In the yard of the inn he saw Runciman himself, and was
quite unable to keep his good news to himself. "My girl has just
been with me," he said, "and what do you think she tells me?"

This is an atom: 
"That she is going to take poor Larry after all. She might do
worse, Mr. Masters."

This is an atom: 
"Poor Larry! I am sorry for him. I have always liked Larry
Twentyman. But that is all over now."

This is an atom: 
"She's not going to have that tweedledum young parson, surely?"

This is an atom: 
"Reginald Morton has made her a set offer."

This is an atom: 
"The squire!" Mr. Masters nodded his head three times. "You don't
say so. Well, Mr. Masters, I don't begrudge it you. He might do
worse. She has taken her pigs well to market at last!"

This is an atom: 
"He is to come to me at four this afternoon."

This is an atom: 
"Well done, Miss Mary! I suppose it's been going on ever so long?"

This is an atom: 
"We fathers and mothers," said the attorney, "never really know
what the young ones are after. Don't mention it just at present,
Runciman. You are such an old friend that I couldn't help telling
you."

This is an atom: 
"Poor Larry!"

This is an atom: 
"I can have the pony, Runciman?"

This is an atom: 
"Certainly you can, Mr. Masters. Tell him to come in and talk it
all over with me. If we don't look to it he'll be taking to drink
regular." At that last meeting at the club, when the late squire's
will was discussed, at which, as the reader may perhaps remember, a
little supper was also discussed in honour of the occasion, poor
Larry had not only been present, but had drunk so pottle-deep that
the landlord had been obliged to put him to bed at the inn, and he
had not been at all as he ought to have been after Lord Rufford's
dinner. Such delinquencies were quite outside the young man's
accustomed way of his life. It had been one of his recognised
virtues that, living as he did a good deal among sporting men and
with a full command of means, he had never drank. But now he had
twice sinned before the eyes of all Dillsborough, and Runciman
thought that he knew how it would be with a young man in his own
house who got drunk in public to drown his sorrow. "I wouldn't see
Larry go astray and spoil himself with liquor," said the
good-natured publican; "for more than I should like to name." Mr.
Masters promised to take the hint, and rode off on his mission.

This is an atom: 
The entrance to Chowton Farm and Bragton gate were nearly opposite,
the latter being perhaps a furlong nearer to Dillsborough. The
attorney when he got to the gate stopped a moment and looked up the
avenue with pardonable pride. The great calamity of his life, the
stunning blow which had almost unmanned him when he was young, and
from which he had never quite been able to rouse himself, had been
the loss of the management of the Bragton property. His grandfather
and his father had been powerful at Bragton, and he had been
brought up in the hope of walking in their paths. Then strangers
had come in, and he had been dispossessed. But how was it with him
now? It had almost made a young man of him again when Reginald
Morton, stepping into his office, asked him as a favour to resume
his old task. But what was that in comparison with this later
triumph? His own child was to be made queen of the place! His
grandson, should she be fortunate enough to be the mother of a son,
would be the squire himself! His visits to the place for the last
twenty years had been very rare indeed. He had been sent for lately
by old Mrs. Morton,--for a purpose which if carried out would have
robbed him of all his good fortune,--but he could not remember
when, before that, he had even passed through the gateway. Now it
would all become familiar to him again. That pony of Runciman's was
pleasant in his paces, and he began to calculate whether the
innkeeper would part with the animal. He stood thus gazing at the
place for some minutes till he saw Reginald Morton in the distance
turning a corner of the road with Mary at his side. He had taken
her from the phaeton and had then insisted on her coming out with
him before she took off her hat. Mr. Masters as soon as he saw them
trotted off to Chowton Farm.

This is an atom: 
Finding Larry lounging at the little garden gate Mr. Masters got
off the pony and taking the young man's arm, walked off with him
towards Dillsborough Wood. He told all his news at once, almost
annihilating poor Larry by the suddenness of the blow. "Larry, Mr.
Reginald Morton has asked my girl to marry him, and she has
accepted him."

This is an atom: 
"The new squire!" said Larry, stopping himself on the path, and
looking as though a gentle wind would suffice to blow him over.

This is an atom: 
"I suppose it has been that way all along, Larry, though we have
not known it."

This is an atom: 
"It was Mr. Morton then that she told me of?"

This is an atom: 
"She did tell you?"

This is an atom: 
"Of course there was no chance for me if he wanted her. But why
didn't they speak out, so that I could have gone away? Oh, Mr.
Masters!"

This is an atom: 
"It was only yesterday she knew it herself."

This is an atom: 
"She must have guessed it"

This is an atom: 
"No;--she knew nothing till he declared himself. And to-day, this
very morning, she has bade me come to you and let you know it. And
she sent you her love."

This is an atom: 
"Her love!" said Larry, chucking the stick which he held in his
hands down to the ground and then stooping to pick it up again.

This is an atom: 
"Yes;--her love. Those were her words, and I am to tell you from
her--to be a man."

This is an atom: 
"Did she say that?"

This is an atom: 
"Yes;--I was to come out to you at once, and bring you that as a
message from her."

This is an atom: 
"Be a man! I could have been a man right enough if she would have
made me one; as good a man as Reginald Morton, though he is squire
of Bragton. But of course I couldn't have given her a house like
that, nor a carriage, nor made her one of the county people. If it
was to go in that way, what could I hope for?"

This is an atom: 
"Don't be unjust to her, Larry."

This is an atom: 
"Unjust to her! If giving her every blessed thing I had in the
world at a moment's notice was unjust, I was ready to be unjust any
day of the week or any hour of the day."

This is an atom: 
"What I mean is that her heart was fixed that way before Reginald
Morton was squire of Bragton. What shall I say in answer to her
message? You will wish her happiness;--will you not?"

This is an atom: 
"Wish her happiness! Oh, heavens!" He could not explain what was in
his mind. Wish her happiness! yes;--the happiness of the angels.
But not him, nor yet with him! And as there could be no arranging
of this, he must leave his wishes unsettled. And yet there was a
certain relief to him in the tidings he had heard. There was now no
more doubt. He need not now remain at Chowton thinking it possible
that the girl might even yet change her mind.

This is an atom: 
"And you will bear in that she wishes you to be a man."

This is an atom: 
"Why did she not make me one? But that is all, all over. You tell
her from me that I am not the man to whimper because I am hurt.
What ought a man to do that I can't do?"

This is an atom: 
"Let her know that you are going about your old pursuits. And,
Larry, would you wish her to know how it was with you at the club
last Saturday?"

This is an atom: 
"Did she hear of that?"

This is an atom: 
"I am sure she has not heard of it. But if that kind of thing
becomes a habit, of course she will hear of it. All Dillsborough
would hear of it, if that became common. At any rate it is not
manly to drown it in drink."

This is an atom: 
"Who says I do that? Nothing will drown it."

This is an atom: 
"I wouldn't speak if I had not known you so long, and loved you so
well. What she means is that you should work."

This is an atom: 
"I do work."

This is an atom: 
"And hunt. Go out to-morrow and show yourself to everybody."

This is an atom: 
"If I could break my neck I would."

This is an atom: 
"Don't let every farmer's son in the county say that Lawrence
Twentyman was so mastered by a girl that he couldn't ride on
horseback when she said him nay."

This is an atom: 
"Everybody knows it, Mr. Masters."

This is an atom: 
"Go among them as if nobody knew it. I'll warrant that nobody will
speak of it"

This is an atom: 
"I don't think any one of 'em would dare to do that," said Larry
brandishing his stick.

This is an atom: 
"Where is it that the hounds are Larry?"

This is an atom: 
"Here; at the old kennel."

This is an atom: 
"Go out and let her see that you have taken her advice. She is
there at the house, and she will recognise you in the park.
Remember that she sends her love to you, and bids you be a man.
And, Larry, come in and see us sometimes. The time will come, I
don't doubt, when you and the squire will be fast friends."

This is an atom: 
"Never!"

This is an atom: 
"You do not know what time can do. I'll just go back now because he
is to come to me this afternoon. Try and bear up and remember that
it is she who bids you be a man." The attorney got upon his pony
and rode back to Dillsborough.

This is an atom: 
Larry who had come back to the yard to see his friend off, returned
by the road into the fields, and went wandering about for a while
in Dillsborough Wood. "Bid him be a man!" Wasn't he a man? Was it
disgraceful to him as a man to be broken-hearted, because a woman
would not love him? If he were provoked he would fight,--perhaps
better than ever, because he would be reckless. Would he not be
ready to fight Reginald Morton with any weapon which could be
thought of for the possession of Mary Masters? If she were in
danger would he not go down into the deep, or through fire to save
her? Were not his old instincts of honesty and truth as strong in
him as ever? Did manliness require that his heart should be
invulnerable? If so he doubted whether he could ever be a man.

This is an atom: 
But what if she meant that manliness required him to hide the
wound? Then there did come upon him a feeling of shame as he
remembered how often he had spoken of his love to those who were
little better than strangers to him, and thought that perhaps such
loquacity was opposed to the manliness which she recommended. And
his conscience smote him as it brought to his recollection the
condition of his mind as he woke in Runciman's bed at the Bush on
last Sunday morning. That at any rate had not been manly. How would
it be with him if he made up his mind never to speak again to her,
and certainly not to him, and to take care that that should be the
only sign left of his suffering? He would hunt, and be keener than
ever;--he would work upon the land with increased diligence; he
would give himself not a moment to think of anything. She should
see and hear what he could do;--but he would never speak to her
again. The hounds would be at the old kennels to-morrow. He would
be there. The place no doubt was Morton's property, but on hunting
mornings all the lands of the county,--and of the next counties if
they can be reached,--are the property of the hunt. Yes; he would
be there; and she would see him in his scarlet coat, and smartest
cravat, with his boots and breeches neat as those of Lord Rufford;
and she should know that he was doing as she bade him. But he would
never speak to her again!

This is an atom: 
As he was returning round the wood, whom should he see skulking
round the corner of it but Goarly?

This is an atom: 
"What business have you in here?" he said, feeling half-inclined to
take the man by the neck and drag him out of the copse.

This is an atom: 
"I saw you, Mr. Twentyman, and I wanted just to have a word with
you."

This is an atom: 
"You are the biggest rascal in all Rufford," said Larry. "I wonder
the lads have left you with a whole bone in your skin."

This is an atom: 
"What have I done worse than any other poor man, Mr. Twentyman?
When I took them herrings I didn't know there was p'ison; and if I
hadn't took 'em, another would. I am going to cut it out of this,
Mr. Twentyman."

This is an atom: 
"May the -- go along with you!" said Larry, wishing his neighbour a
very unpleasant companion.

This is an atom: 
"And of course I must sell the place. Think what it would be to
you! I shouldn't like it to go into his Lordship's hands. It's all
through Bean I know, but his Lordship has had a down on me ever
since he came to the property. It's as true as true about my old
woman's geese. There's forty acres of it. What would you say to 40
pounds an acre?"

This is an atom: 
The idea of having the two extra fields made Larry's mouth water,
in spite of all his misfortunes. The desire for land among such as
Larry Twentyman is almost a disease in England. With these two
fields he would be able to walk almost round Dillsborough Wood
without quitting his own property. He had been talking of selling
Chowton within the last week or two. He had been thinking of
selling it at the moment when Mr. Masters rode up to him. And yet
now he was almost tempted to a new purchase by this man. But the
man was too utterly a blackguard,--was too odious to him.

This is an atom: 
"If it comes into the market, I may bid for it as well as another,"
he said, "but I wouldn't let myself down to have any dealings with
you."

This is an atom: 
"Then, Mr. Larry, you shall never have a sod of it," said Goarly,
dropping himself over the fence on to his own field.

This is an atom: 
A few minutes afterwards Larry met Bean, and told him that Goarly
had been in the wood. "If I catch him, Mr. Twentyman, I'll give him
sore bones," said Bean. "I wonder how he ever got back to his own
place alive that day." Then Bean asked Larry whether he meant to be
at the meet to-morrow, and Larry said that he thought he should.
"Tony's almost afraid to bring them in even yet," said Bean; "but
if there's a herring left in this wood, I'll eat it myself--
strychnine and all."

This is an atom: 
After that Larry went and looked at his horses, and absolutely gave
his mare "Bicycle" a gallop round the big grass field himself. Then
those who were about the place knew that something had happened,
and that he was in a way to be cured. "You'll hunt to-morrow, won't
you, Larry?" said his mother affectionately.

This is an atom: 
"Who told you?"

This is an atom: 
"Nobody told me;--but you will, Larry; won't you?"

This is an atom: 
"May be I will." Then, as he was leaving the room, when he was in
the door-way, so that she should not see his face, he told her the
news. "She's going to marry the squire, yonder."

This is an atom: 
"Mary Masters!"

This is an atom: 
"I always hated him from the first moment I saw him. What do you
expect from a fellow who never gets a-top of a horse?" Then he
turned away, and was not seen again till long after teatime.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XIX

This is an atom: 
"Is it tanti?"

This is an atom: 
Reginald Morton entertained serious thoughts of cleansing himself
from the reproach which Larry cast upon him when describing his
character to his mother. "I think I shall take to hunting," he said
to Mary.

This is an atom: 
"But you'll tumble off, dear."

This is an atom: 
"No doubt I shall, and I must try to begin in soft places. I don't
see why I shouldn't do it gradually in a small way. I shouldn't
ever become a Nimrod, like Lord Rufford or your particular friend
Mr. Twentyman."

This is an atom: 
"He is my particular friend."

This is an atom: 
"So I perceive. I couldn't shine as he shines, but I might
gradually learn to ride after him at a respectful distance. A man
at Rome ought to do as the Romans do."

This is an atom: 
"Why wasn't Hoppet Hall Rome as much as Bragton?"

This is an atom: 
"Well;--it wasn't. While fortune enabled me to be happy at Hoppet
Hall--"

This is an atom: 
"That is unkind, Reg."

This is an atom: 
"While fortune oppressed me with celibate misery at Hoppet Hall,
nobody hated me for not hunting;--and as I could not very well
afford it, I was not considered to be entering a protest against
the amusement. As it is now I find that unless I consent to risk my
neck at any rate five or six times every winter, I shall be
regarded in that light"

This is an atom: 
"I wouldn't be frightened into doing anything I didn't like," said
Mary.

This is an atom: 
"How do you know that I shan't like it? The truth is I have had a
letter this morning from a benevolent philosopher which has almost
settled the question for me. He wants me to join a society for the
suppression of British sports as being barbarous and antipathetic
to the intellectual pursuits of an educated man. I would
immediately shoot, fish, hunt and go out ratting, if I could hope
for the least success. I know I should never shoot anything but the
dog and the gamekeepers, and that I should catch every weed in the
river; but I think that in the process of seasons I might jump over
a hedge."

This is an atom: 
"Kate will show you the way to do that"

This is an atom: 
"With Kate and Mr. Twentyman to help me, and a judicious system of
liberal tips to Tony Tuppett, I could make my way about on a quiet
old nag, and live respected by my neighbours. The fact is I hate
with my whole heart the trash of the philanimalist."

This is an atom: 
"What is a-a--I didn't quite catch the thing you hate?"

This is an atom: 
"The thing is a small knot of self-anxious people who think that
they possess among them all the bowels of the world."

This is an atom: 
"Possess all the what, Reginald?"

This is an atom: 
"I said bowels,--using an ordinary but very ill-expressed metaphor.
The ladies and gentlemen to whom I allude, not looking very clearly
into the systems of pains and pleasures in accordance with which we
have to live, put their splay feet down now upon this ordinary
operation and now upon that, and call upon the world to curse the
cruelty of those who will not agree with them. A lady whose tippet
is made from the skins of twenty animals who have been wired in the
snow and then left to die of starvation--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Reginald!"

This is an atom: 
"That is the way of it. I am not now saying whether it is right or
wrong. The lady with the tippet will justify the wires and the
starvation because, as she will say, she uses the fur. An honest
blanket would keep her just as warm. But the fox who suffers
perhaps ten minutes of agony should he not succeed as he usually
does in getting away,--is hunted only for amusement! It is true
that the one fox gives amusement for hours to perhaps some hundred;
but it is only for amusement. What riles me most is that these
would-be philosophers do not or will not see that recreation is as
necessary to the world as clothes or food, and the providing of the
one is as legitimate a business as the purveying of the other."

This is an atom: 
"People must eat and wear clothes."

This is an atom: 
"And practically they must be amused. They ignore the great
doctrine of 'tanti.'"

This is an atom: 
"I never heard of it"

This is an atom: 
"You shall, dear, some day. It is the doctrine by which you should
regulate everything you do and every word you utter. Now do you and
Kate put on your hats and we'll walk to the bridge."

This is an atom: 
This preaching of a sermon took place after breakfast at Bragton on
the morning of Saturday, and the last order had reference to a
scheme they had on foot to see the meet at the old kennels. On the
previous afternoon Reginald Morton had come into Dillsborough and
had very quietly settled everything with the attorney. Having made
up his mind to do the thing he was very quick in the doing of it.
He hated the idea of secrecy in such an affair, and when Mrs.
Masters asked him whether he had any objection to have the marriage
talked about, expressed his willingness that she should employ the
town crier to make it public if she thought it expedient. "Oh, Mr.
Morton, how very funny you are," said the lady. "Quite in earnest,
Mrs. Masters," he replied. Then he kissed the two girls who were to
be his sisters, and finished the visit by carrying off the younger
to spend a day or two with her sister at Bragton. "I know," he
said, whispering to Mary as he left the front door, "that I ought
not to go out hunting so soon after my poor cousin's death; but as
he was a cousin once removed, I believe I may walk as far as the
bridge without giving offence."

This is an atom: 
When they were there they saw all the arrivals just as they were
seen on the same spot a few months earlier by a very different
party. Mary and Kate stood on the bridge together, while he
remained a little behind leaning on the style. She, poor girl, had
felt some shame in showing herself, knowing that some who were
present would have heard of her engagement, and that others would
be told of it as soon as she was seen. "Are you ashamed of what you
are going to do?" he asked.

This is an atom: 
"Ashamed! I don't suppose that there is a girl in England so proud
as I am at this minute."

This is an atom: 
"I don't know that there is anything to be proud of, but if you are
not ashamed, why shouldn't you show yourself? Marriage is an
honourable state!" She could only pinch his arm, and do as he bade
her.

This is an atom: 
Glomax in his tandem, and Lord Rufford in his drag, were rather
late. First there came one or two hunting men out of the town,
Runciman, Dr. Nupper, and the hunting saddler. Then there arrived
Henry Stubbings with a string of horses, mounted by little boys,
ready for his customers, and full of wailing to his friend
Runciman. Here was nearly the end of March and the money he had
seen since Christmas was little more, as he declared, than what he
could put into his eye and see none the worse. "Charge 'em ten per
cent interest," said Runciman. "Then they thinks they can carry on
for another year," said Stubbings despondingly. While this was
going on, Larry walked his favourite mare "Bicycle" on to the
ground, dressed with the utmost care, but looking very moody,
almost fierce, as though he did not wish anybody to speak to him.
Tony Tuppett, who had known him since a boy, nodded at him
affectionately, and said how glad he was to see him;--but even this
was displeasing to Larry. He did not see the girls on the bridge,
but took up his place near them. He was thinking so much of his own
unhappiness and of what he believed others would say of him, that
he saw almost nothing. There he sat on his mare, carrying out the
purpose to which he had been led by Mary's message, but wishing
with all his heart that he was back again, hidden within his own
house at the other side of the wood.

This is an atom: 
Mary, as soon as she saw him, blushed up to her eyes, then turning
round looked with wistful eyes into the face of the man she was
engaged to marry, and with rapid step walked across the bridge up
to the side of Larry's horse, and spoke to him with her sweet low
voice. "Larry," she said. He turned round to her very quickly,
showing how much he was startled. Then she put up her hand to him,
and of course he took it. "Larry, I am so glad to see you. Did papa
give you a message?"

This is an atom: 
"Yes, Miss Masters. He told me, I know it all."

This is an atom: 
"Say a kind word to me, Larry."

This is an atom: 
"I--I--I--You know very well what's in my mind. Though it were to
kill me, I should wish you well"

This is an atom: 
"I hope you'll have a good hunt, Larry." Then she retired back to
the bridge and again looked to her lover to know whether he would
approve. There were so few there, and Larry had been so far apart
from the others, that she was sure no one had heard the few words
which had passed between them; nor could anyone have observed what
she had done, unless it were old Nupper, or Mr. Runciman, or Tony
Tuppett. But yet she thought that it perhaps was bold, and that he
would be angry. But he came up to her, and placing himself between
her and Kate, whispered into her ear, "Bravely done, my girl. After
a little I will try to be as brave, but I could never do it as
well." Larry in the meantime had moved his mare away, and before
the Master had arrived, was walking slowly up his own road to
Chowton Farm.

This is an atom: 
The Captain was soon there, and Lord Rufford with his friends, and
Harry Stubbings' string, and Tony were set in motion. But before
they stirred there was a consultation, to which Bean the gamekeeper
was called,--as to the safety of Dillsborough Wood. Dillsborough
Wood had not been drawn yet since Scrobby's poison had taken effect
on the old fox, and there were some few who affected to think that
there still might be danger. Among these was the Master himself,
who asked Fred Botsey with a sneer whether he thought that such
hounds as those were to be picked up at every corner. But Bean
again offered to eat any herring that might be there, poison
included, and Lord Rufford laughed at the danger. "It's no use my
having foxes, Glomax, if you won't draw the cover." This the Lord
said with a touch of anger, and the Lord's anger, if really roused,
might be injurious. It was therefore decided that the hounds should
again be put through the Bragton shrubberies,--just for compliment
to the new squire; and that then they should go off to Dillsborough
Wood as rapidly as might be.

This is an atom: 
Larry walked his beast all the way up home very slowly, and getting
off her, put her into the stable and went into the house.

This is an atom: 
"Is anything wrong?" asked the mother.

This is an atom: 
"Everything is wrong." Then he stood with his back to the kitchen
fire for nearly half an hour without speaking a word. He was trying
to force himself to follow out her idea of manliness, and telling
himself that it was impossible. The first tone of her voice, the
first glance at her face, had driven him home. Why had she called
him Larry again and again, so tenderly, in that short moment, and
looked at him with those loving eyes? Then he declared to himself,
without uttering a word, that she did not understand anything about
it; she did not comprehend the fashion of his love when she
thought, as she did think, that a soft word would be compensation.
He looked round to see if his mother or the servant were there, and
when he found that the coast was clear, he dashed his hands to his
eyes and knocked away the tears. He threw up both his arms and
groaned, and then he remembered her message, "Bid him be a man."

This is an atom: 
At that moment he heard the sound of horses, and going near the
window, so as to be hidden from curious eyes as they passed, he saw
the first whip trot on, with the hounds after him, and Tony Tuppett
among them. Then there was a long string of horsemen, all moving up
to the wood, and a carriage or two, and after them the stragglers
of the field. He let them all go by, and then he repeated the words
again, "Bid him be a man."

This is an atom: 
He took up his hat, jammed it on his head, and went out into the
yard. As he crossed to the stables Runciman came up alone. "Why,
Larry, you'll be late," he said.

This is an atom: 
"Go on, Mr. Runciman, I'll follow."

This is an atom: 
"I'll wait till you are mounted. You'll be better for somebody with
you. You've got the mare, have you? You'll show some of them your
heels if they get away from here. Is she as fast as she was last
year, do you think?"

This is an atom: 
"Upon my word I don't know," said Larry, as he dragged himself into
the saddle.

This is an atom: 
"Shake yourself, old fellow, and don't carry on like that. What is
she after all but a girl?" The poor fellow looked at his intending
comforter, but couldn't speak a word. "A man shouldn't let himself
be put upon by circumstances so as to be only half himself. Hang
it, man, cheer up, and don't let 'em see you going about like that.
It ain't what a fellow of your kidney ought to be. If they haven't
found I'm a nigger,--and by the holy he's away. Come along Larry
and forget the petticoats for half an hour." So saying, Runciman
broke into a gallop, and Larry's mare doing the same, he soon
passed the innkeeper and was up at the covert side just as Tony
Tuppett with half a score of hounds round him, was forcing his way
through the bushes, out of the coverts into the open field. "There
ain't no poison this time, Mr. Twentyman," said the huntsman, as,
setting his eye on a gap in the further fence, he made his way
across the field.

This is an atom: 
The fox headed away for a couple of miles towards Impington, as was
the custom with the Dillsborough foxes, and then turning to the
left was soon over the country borders into Ufford. The pace from
the first starting was very good. Larry, under such provocation as
that of course would ride, and he did ride. Up as far as the
country brook, many were well up. The land was no longer deep; and
as the field had not been scattered at the starting, all the men
who usually rode were fairly well placed as they came to the brook;
but it was acknowledged afterwards that Larry was over it the
first. Glomax got into it,--as he always does into brooks, and
young Runce hurt his horse's shoulder at the opposite bank. Lord
Rufford's horse balked it, to the Lord's disgust; but took it
afterwards, not losing very much ground. Tony went in and out, the
crafty old dog knowing the one bit of hard ground. Then they
crossed Purbeck field, as it is still called--which twenty years
since was a wide waste of land, but is now divided by new fences,
very grievous to half-blown horses. Sir John Purefoy got a nasty
fall over some stiff timber, and here many a half-hearted rider
turned to the right into the lane. Hampton and his Lordship, and
Battersby, with Fred Botsey and Larry, took it all as it came, but
through it all not one of them could give Larry a lead. Then there
was manoeuvring into a wood and out of it again, and that saddest
of all sights to the riding man, a cloud of horsemen on the road as
well placed as though they had ridden the line throughout. In
getting out of the road Hampton's horse slipped up with him, and,
though he saw it all, he was never able again to compete for a
place. The fox went through the Hampton Wick coverts without
hanging a moment, just throwing the hounds for two minutes off
their scent at the gravel pits. The check was very useful to Tony,
who had got his second horse and came up sputtering, begging the
field for G--'s sake to be,--in short to be anywhere but where they
were. Then they were off again down the hill to the left, through
Mappy springs and along the top of Ilveston copse, every yard of
which is grass, till the number began to be select. At last in a
turnip field, three yards from the fence, they turned him over, and
Tony, as he jumped off his horse among the hounds, acknowledged to
himself that Larry might have had his hand first upon the animal
had he cared to do so.

This is an atom: 
"Twentyman, I'll give you two hundred for your mare," said Lord
Rufford.

This is an atom: 
"Ah, my Lord, there are two things that would about kill me."

This is an atom: 
"What are they, Larry?" asked Harry Stubbings.

This is an atom: 
"To offend his Lordship, or to part with the mare."

This is an atom: 
"You shall do neither," said Lord Rufford; "but upon my word I
think she's the fastest thing in this county." All of which did not
cure poor Larry, but it helped to enable him to be a man.

This is an atom: 
The fox had been killed close to Norrington, and the run was
remembered with intense gratification for many a long day after.
"It's that kind of thing that makes hunting beat everything else,"
said Lord Rufford, as he went home. That day's sport certainly had
been "tanti," and Glomax and the two counties boasted of it for the
next three years.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XX

This is an atom: 
Benedict

This is an atom: 
Lady Penwether declared to her husband that she had never seen her
brother so much cowed as he had been by Miss Trefoil's visit to
Rufford. It was not only that he was unable to assert his usual
powers immediately after the attack made upon him, but that on the
following day, at Scrobby's trial, on the Saturday when he started
to the meet, and on the Sunday following when he allowed himself to
be easily persuaded to go to church, he was silent, sheepish, and
evidently afraid of himself. "It is a great pity that we shouldn't
take the ball at the hop," she said to Sir George.

This is an atom: 
"What ball;--and what hop?"

This is an atom: 
"Get him to settle himself. There ought to be an end to this kind
of thing now. He has got out of this mess, but every time it
becomes worse and worse, and he'll be taken in horribly by some
harpy if we don't get him to marry decently. I fancy he was very
nearly going in this last affair." Sir George, in this matter, did
not quite agree with his wife. It was in his opinion right to avoid
Miss Trefoil, but he did not see why his brother-in-law should be
precipitated into matrimony with Miss Penge. According to his ideas
in such matters a man should be left alone. Therefore, as was
customary with him when he opposed his wife, he held his tongue.
"You have been called in three or four times when he has been just
on the edge of the cliff."

This is an atom: 
"I don't know that that is any reason why he should be pushed
over."

This is an atom: 
"There is not a word to be said against Caroline. She has a fine
fortune of her own, and some of the best blood in the kingdom."

This is an atom: 
"But if your brother does not care for her,--"

This is an atom: 
"That's nonsense, George. As for liking, it's all the same to him.
Rufford is good-natured, and easily pleased, and can like any
woman. Caroline is very good-looking,--a great deal handsomer than
that horrid creature ever was,--and with manners fit for any
position. I've no reason to wish to force a wife on him; but of
course he'll marry, and unless he's guided, he'll certainly marry
badly."

This is an atom: 
"Is Miss Penge in love with him?" asked Sir George in a tone of voice
that was intended to be provoking. His wife looked at him, asking him
plainly by her countenance whether he was such a fool as that? Was it
likely that any untitled young lady of eight-and-twenty should be
wanting in the capacity of being in love with a young lord, handsome
and possessed of forty thousand a year without encumbrances? Sir
George, though he did not approve, was not eager enough in his
disapproval to lay any serious embargo on his wife's proceedings.

This is an atom: 
The first steps taken were in the direction of the hero's personal
comfort. He was flattered and petted, as his sister knew how to
flatter and pet him; and Miss Penge in a quiet way assisted Lady
Penwether in the operation. For a day or two he had not much to say
for himself; but every word he did say was an oracle. His horses
were spoken of as demigods, and his projected fishing operations
for June and July became matters of most intense interest. Evil
things were said of Arabella Trefoil, but in all the evil things
said no hint was given that Lord Rufford had behaved badly or had
been in danger. Lady Penwether, not quite knowing the state of his
mind, thought that there might still be some lurking affection for
the young lady. "Did you ever see anybody look so vulgar and
hideous as she did when she marched across the park?" asked Lady
Penwether.

This is an atom: 
"Thank goodness I did not see her," said Miss Penge.

This is an atom: 
"I never saw her look so handsome as when she came up to me," said
Lord Rufford.

This is an atom: 
"But such a thing to do!"

This is an atom: 
"Awful!" said Miss Penge.

This is an atom: 
"She is the pluckiest girl I ever came across in my life," said
Lord Rufford. He knew very well what they were at, and was already
almost inclined to think that they might as well be allowed to have
their way. Miss Penge was ladylike, quiet, and good, and was like a
cool salad in a man's mouth after spiced meat. And the money would
enable him to buy the Purefoy property which would probably be soon
in the market. But he felt that he might as well give them a little
trouble before he allowed himself to be hooked. It certainly was
not by any arrangement of his own that he found himself walking
alone with Miss Penge that Sunday afternoon in the park; nor did it
seem to be by hers. He thought of that other Sunday at Mistletoe,
when he had been compelled to wander with Arabella, when he met the
Duchess, and when, as he often told himself, a little more
good-nature or a little more courage on her grace's part would have
completed the work entirely. Certainly had the Duke come to him
that night, after the journey from Stamford, he would have
capitulated. As he walked along and allowed himself to be talked to
by Miss Penge, he did tell himself that she would be the better
angel of the two. She could not hunt with him, as Arabella would
have done; but then a man does not want his wife to gallop across
the country after him. She might perhaps object to cigars and soda
water after eleven o'clock, but then what assurance had he that
Arabella would not have objected still more loudly. She had sworn
that she would never be opposed to his little pleasures; but he
knew what such oaths were worth. Marriage altogether was a bore;
but having a name and a large fortune, it was incumbent on him to
transmit them to an immediate descendant. And perhaps it was a
worse bore to grow old without having specially bound any other
human being to his interests. "How well I recollect that spot,"
said Miss Penge. "It was there that Major Caneback took the fence."

This is an atom: 
"That was not where he fell"

This is an atom: 
"Oh no;--I did not see that. It would have haunted me for ever had
I done so.--But it was there that I thought he must kill himself.
That was a terrible time, Lord Rufford."

This is an atom: 
"Terrible to poor Caneback certainly."

This is an atom: 
"Yes, and to all of us. Do you remember that fearful ball? We were
all so unhappy,--because you suffered so much."

This is an atom: 
"It was bad."

This is an atom: 
"And that woman who persecuted you! We all knew that you felt it"

This is an atom: 
"I felt that poor man's death."

This is an atom: 
"Yes;--and you felt the other nuisance too."

This is an atom: 
"I remember that you told me that you would cling on to my legs."

This is an atom: 
"Eleanor said so;--and when it was explained to me, what clinging
on to your legs meant, I remember saying that I wished to be
understood as being one to help. I love your sister so well that
anything which would break her heart would make me unhappy."

This is an atom: 
"You did not care for my own welfare in the matter?"

This is an atom: 
"What ought I say, Lord Rufford, in answer to that? Of course I did
care. But I knew that it was impossible that you should really set
your affections on such a person as Miss Trefoil. I told Eleanor
that it would come to nothing. I was sure of it."

This is an atom: 
"Why should it have to come to nothing,--as you call it?"

This is an atom: 
"Because you are a gentleman and because she--is not a lady. I
don't know that we women can quite understand how it is that you
men amuse yourselves with such persons."

This is an atom: 
"I didn't amuse myself."

This is an atom: 
"I never thought you did very much. There was something I suppose
in her riding, something in her audacity, something perhaps in her
vivacity;--but through it all I did not think that you were
enjoying yourself. You may be sure of this, Lord Rufford, that when
a woman is not specially liked by any other woman, she ought not to
be specially liked by any man. I have never heard that Miss Trefoil
had a female friend."

This is an atom: 
From day to day there were little meetings and conversations of
this kind till Lord Rufford found himself accustomed to Miss
Penge's solicitude for his welfare. In all that passed between them
the lady affected a status that was altogether removed from that of
making or receiving love. There had come to be a peculiar
friendship,--because of Eleanor. A week of this kind of thing had
not gone by before Miss Penge found herself able to talk of and
absolutely to describe this peculiar feeling, and could almost say
how pleasant was such friendship, divested of the burden of all
amatory possibilities. But through it all Lord Rufford knew that he
would have to marry Miss Penge.

This is an atom: 
It was not long before he yielded in pure weariness. Who has not
felt, as he stood by a stream into which he knew that it was his
fate to plunge, the folly of delaying the shock? In his present
condition he had no ease. His sister threatened him with a return
of Arabella. Miss Penge required from him sensational conversation.
His brother-in-law was laughing at him in his sleeve. His very
hunting friends treated him as though the time were come. In all
that he did the young lady took an interest which bored him
excessively,--to put an end to which he only saw one certain way.
He therefore asked her to be Lady Rufford before he got on his drag
to go out hunting on the last Saturday in March. "Rufford," she
said, looking up into his face with her lustrous eyes, and speaking
with a sweet, low, silvery voice,--"are you sure of your self?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, yes."

This is an atom: 
"Quite sure of yourself?"

This is an atom: 
"Never so sure in my life."

This is an atom: 
"Then dearest, dearest Rufford, I will not scruple to say that I
also am sure." And so the thing was settled very much to his
comfort. He could hardly have done better had he sought through all
England for a bride. She will be true to him, and never give him
cause for a moment's jealousy. She will like his title, his house,
and his property. She will never spend a shilling more than she
ought to do. She will look very sharply after him, but will not
altogether debar him from his accustomed pleasures. She will grace
his table, nurse his children, and never for a moment give him
cause to be ashamed of her. He will think that he loves her, and
after a lapse of ten or fifteen years will probably really be fond
of her. From the moment that she is Lady Rufford, she will love
him,--as she loves everything that is her own.

This is an atom: 
In spite of all his antecedents no one doubted his faith in this
engagement;--no one wished to hurry him very much. When the
proposition had been made and accepted, and when the hero of it had
gone off on his drag, Miss Penge communicated the tidings to her
friend. "I think he has behaved very wisely," said Lady Penwether.

This is an atom: 
"Well;--feeling as I do of course I think he has. I hope he thinks
the same of me. I had many doubts about it, but I do believe that I
can make him a good wife." Lady Penwether thought that her friend
was hardly sufficiently thankful, and strove to tell her so in her
own gentle, friendly way. But Miss Penge held her head up and was
very stout, and would not acknowledge any cause for gratitude. Lady
Penwether, when she saw how it was to be gave way a little. Close
friendship with her future sister-in-law would be very necessary to
her comfort, and Miss Penge, since the law-suit was settled, had
never been given to yielding.

This is an atom: 
"My dear Rufford," said the sister affectionately, "I congratulate
you with all my heart; I do indeed. I am quite sure that you could
not have done better."

This is an atom: 
"I don't know that I could."

This is an atom: 
"She is a gem of inestimable price, and most warmly attached to
you. And if this property is to be bought, of course the money will
be a great thing."

This is an atom: 
"Money is always comfortable."

This is an atom: 
"Of course it is, and then there is nothing to be desired. If I had
named the girl that I would have wished you to love, it would been
Caroline Penge." She need hardly have said this as she had in fact
been naming the girl for the last three or four months. The news
was soon spread about the country and the fashionable world; and
everybody was pleased,--except the Trefoil family.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XXI

This is an atom: 
Arabella's Success

This is an atom: 
When Arabella Trefoil got back to Portugal Street after her visit
to Rufford, she was ill. The effort she had made, the unaccustomed
labour, and the necessity of holding herself aloft before the man
who had rejected her, were together more than her strength could
bear, and she was taken up to bed in a fainting condition. It was
not till the next morning that she was able even to open the letter
which contained the news of John Morton's legacy. When she had read
the letter and realized the contents, she took to weeping in a
fashion very unlike her usual habits. She was still in bed, and
there she remained for two or three days, during which she had time
to think of her past life,--and to think also a little of the
future. Old Mrs. Green came to her once or twice a day, but she was
necessarily left to the nursing of her own maid. Every evening
Mounser Green called and sent up tender enquiries; but in all this
there was very little to comfort her. There she lay with the letter
in her hand, thinking that the only man who had endeavoured to be
of service to her was he whom she had treated with unexampled
perfidy. Other men had petted her, had amused themselves with her,
and then thrown her over, had lied to her and laughed at her, till
she had been taught to think that a man was a heartless, cruel,
slippery animal, made indeed to be caught occasionally, but in the
catching of which infinite skill was wanted, and in which infinite
skill might be thrown away. But this man had been true to her to
the last in spite of her treachery!

This is an atom: 
She knew that she was heartless herself, and that she belonged to a
heartless world;--but she knew also that there was a world of women
who were not heartless. Such women had looked down upon her as from
a great height, but she in return had been able to ridicule them.
They had chosen their part, and she had chosen hers,--and had
thought that she might climb to the glory of wealth and rank, while
they would have to marry hard-working clergymen and briefless
barristers. She had often been called upon to vindicate to herself
the part she had chosen, and had always done so by magnifying in
her own mind the sin of the men with whom she had to deal. At this
moment she thought that Lord Rufford had treated her villainously,
whereas her conduct to him had been only that which the necessity
of the case required. To Lord Rufford she had simply behaved after
the manner of her class, heartless of course, but only in the way
which the "custom of the trade" justified. Each had tried to
circumvent the other, and she as the weaker had gone to the wall.
But John Morton had believed in her and loved her. Oh, how she
wished that she had deserted her class, and clung to him,--even
though she should now have been his widow. The legacy was a burden
to her. Even she had conscience enough to be sorry for a day or two
that he had named her in his will.

This is an atom: 
And what would she do with herself for the future? Her quarrel with
her mother had been very serious, each swearing that under no
circumstances would she again consent to live with the other. The
daughter of course knew that the mother would receive her again
should she ask to be received. But in such case she must go back
with shortened pinions and blunted beak. Her sojourn with Mrs.
Green was to last for one month, and at the end of that time she
must seek for a home. If she put John Morton's legacy out to
interest, she would now be mistress of a small income;--but she
understood money well enough to know to what obduracy of poverty
she would thus be subjected. As she looked the matter closer in the
face the horrors became more startling and more manifest. Who would
have her in their houses? Where should she find society,--where the
possibility of lovers? What would be her life, and what her
prospects? Must she give up for ever the game for which she had
lived, and own that she had been conquered in the fight and beaten
even to death? Then she thought over the long list of her past
lovers, trying to see whether there might be one of the least
desirable at whom she might again cast her javelins. But there was
not one.

This is an atom: 
The tender messages from Mounser Green came to her day by day. Mounser
Green, as the nephew of her hostess, had been very kind to her; but
hitherto he had never appeared to her in the light of a possible lover.
He was a clerk in the Foreign Office, waiting for his aunt's money;--a
man whom she had met in society and whom she knew to be well thought of
by those above him in wealth and rank; but she had never regarded him
as prey,--or as a man whom any girl would want to marry. He was one of
those of the other sex who would most probably look out for prey, who,
if he married at all, would marry an heiress. She, in her time, had
been on good terms with many such a one,--had counted them among her
intimate friends, had made use of them and been useful to them,--but
she had never dreamed of marrying any one of them. They were there in
society for altogether a different purpose. She had not hesitated to
talk to Mounser Green about Lord Rufford,--and though she had pretended
to make a secret of the place to which she was going when he had taken
her to the railway, she had not at all objected to his understanding
her purpose. Up to that moment there had certainly been no thought on
her part of transferring what she was wont to call her affections to
Mounser Green as a suitor.

This is an atom: 
But as she lay in bed, thinking of her future life, tidings were
brought to her by Mrs. Green that Mounser had accepted the mission
to Patagonia. Could it be that her destiny intended her to go out
to Patagonia as the wife, if not of one minister, then of another?
There would be a career,--a way of living, if not exactly that
which she would have chosen. Of Patagonia, as a place of residence,
she had already formed ideas. In some of those moments in which she
had foreseen that Lord Rufford would be lost to her, she had told
herself that it would be better to reign in Hell than serve in
Heaven. Among Patagonian women she would probably be the first.
Among English ladies it did not seem that at present she had
prospect of a high place. It would be long before Lord Rufford
would be for= gotten,--and she had not space enough before her for
forgettings which would require time for their accomplishment.
Mounser Green had declared with energy that Lord Rufford had
behaved very badly. There are men who feel it to be their mission
to come in for the relief of ladies who have been badly treated. If
Mounser Green wished to be one of them on her behalf, and to take
her out with him to his very far-away employment, might not this be
the best possible solution of her present difficulties?

This is an atom: 
On the evening of the third day after her return she was able to
come down-stairs and the line of thought which has been suggested
for her induced her to undertake some trouble with the white and
pink robe, or dressing-gown in which she had appeared. "Well, my
dear, you are smart," the old lady said.

This is an atom: 
"'Odious in woollen;--'twould a saint provoke,
     Were the last words which poor Narcissa spoke.'"

This is an atom: 
said Arabella, who had long since provided herself with this
quotation for such occasions. "I hope I am not exactly dying, Mrs.
Green; but I don't see why I should not object to be 'frightful,'--
as well as the young lady who was."

This is an atom: 
"I suppose it's all done for Mounser's benefit?"

This is an atom: 
"Partly for you, partly for Mounser, and a good deal for myself.
What a very odd name. Why did they call him Mounser? I used to
think it was because he was in the Foreign Office,--a kind of
chaff, as being half a Frenchman."

This is an atom: 
"My mother's maiden name was Mounser, and it isn't French at all. I
don't see why it should not be as good a Christian name as
Willoughby or Howard."

This is an atom: 
"Quite as good, and much more distinctive. There can't be another
Mounser Green in the world."

This is an atom: 
"And very few other young men like him. At my time of life I find
it very hard his going away. And what will he do in such a place as
that,--all alone and without a wife?"

This is an atom: 
"Why don't you make him take a wife?"

This is an atom: 
"There isn't time now. He'll have to start in May."

This is an atom: 
"Plenty of time. Trousseaus are now got up by steam, and girls are
kept ready to marry at the shortest notice. If I were you I should
certainly advise him to take out some healthy young woman, capable
of bearing the inclemencies of the Patagonian climate."

This is an atom: 
"As for that the climate is delicious," said Mrs. Green, who
certainly was not led by her guest's manner to suspect the nature
of her guest's more recent intentions.

This is an atom: 
Mounser Green on this afternoon came to Portugal Street before he
himself went out to dinner, choosing the hour at which his aunt was
wont to adorn herself. "And so you are to be the hero of
Patagonia?" said Arabella as she put out her hand to congratulate
him on his appointment.

This is an atom: 
"I don't know about heroism, but it seems that I am to go there,"
said Mounser with much melancholy in his voice.

This is an atom: 
"I should have thought you were the last man to leave London
willingly."

This is an atom: 
"Well, yes; I should have said so myself. And I do flatter myself I
shall be missed. But what had I before me here? This may lead to
something."

This is an atom: 
"Indeed you will be missed, Mr. Green."

This is an atom: 
"It's very kind of you to say so."

This is an atom: 
"Patagonia! It is such a long way off!" Then she began to consider
whether he had ever heard of her engagement with the last
Minister-elect to that country. That he should know all about Lord
Rufford was a matter of course; but what chance could there be for
her if he also knew that other affair?

This is an atom: 
"We were intimately acquainted with Mr. Morton in Washington and
were surprised that he should have accepted it. Poor Morton. He was
a friend of mine. We used to call him the Paragon because he never
made mistakes. I had heard that you and Lady Augusta were a good
deal with him in Washington."

This is an atom: 
"We were, indeed. You do not know my good news as yet, I suppose.
Your Paragon, as you call him, has left me five thousand pounds."
Of course it would be necessary that he should know it some day if
this new plan of hers were to be carried out;--and if the plan
should fail, his knowing it could do no harm.

This is an atom: 
"How very nice for you. Poor Morton!"

This is an atom: 
"It is well that somebody should behave well, when others treat one
so badly, Mr. Green. Yes; he has left me five thousand pounds" Then
she showed him the lawyer's letter. "Perhaps as I am so separated
at present from all my own people by this affair with Lord Rufford,
you would not mind seeing the man for me." Of course he promised to
see the lawyer and to do everything that was necessary. "The truth
is, Mr. Green, Mr. Morton was very warmly attached to me. I was a
foolish girl, and could not return it. I thought of it long and was
then obliged to tell him that I could not entertain just that sort
of feeling for him. You cannot think now how bitter is my regret;--
that I should have allowed myself to trust a man so false and
treacherous as Lord Rufford, and that I should have perhaps added a
pang to the deathbed of one so good as Mr. Morton." And so she told
her little story;--not caring very much whether it were believed or
not, but finding it to be absolutely essential that some story
should be told.

This is an atom: 
During the next day or two Mounser Green thought a great deal about
it. That the story was not exactly true, he knew very well. But it
is not to be expected that a girl before her marriage should be
exactly true about her old loves. That she had been engaged to Lord
Rufford and had been cruelly jilted by him he did believe. That she
had at one time been engaged to the Paragon he was almost sure. The
fact that the Paragon had left her money was a strong argument that
she had not behaved badly to him. But there was much that was quite
certain. The five thousand pounds were quite certain; and the
money, though it could not be called a large fortune for a young
lady, would pay his debts and send him out a free man to Patagonia.
And the family honours were certainly true. She was the undoubted
niece of the Duke of Mayfair, and such a connection might in his
career be of service to him. Lord Mistletoe was a prig, but would
probably be a member of the Government. Mounser Green liked Dukes,
and loved a Duchess in his heart of hearts. If he could only be
assured that this niece would not be repudiated he thought that the
speculation might answer in spite of any ambiguity in the lady's
antecedents.

This is an atom: 
"Have you heard about Arabella's good fortune?" young Glossop asked
the next morning at the office.

This is an atom: 
"You forget, my boy," said Mounser Green, "that the young lady of
whom you speak is a friend of mine:'

This is an atom: 
"Oh lord! So I did. I beg your pardon, old fellow." There was no
one else in the room at the moment, and Glossop in asking the
question had in truth forgotten what he had heard of this new
intimacy.

This is an atom: 
"Don't you learn to be ill-natured, Glossop. And remember that
there is no form so bad as that of calling young ladies by their
Christian names. I do know that poor Morton has left Miss Trefoil a
sum of money which is at any rate evidence that he thought well of
her to the last."

This is an atom: 
"Of course it is. I didn't mean to offend you. I wouldn't do it for
worlds,--as you are going away." That afternoon, when Green's back
was turned, Glossop gave it as his opinion that something
particular would turn up between Mounser and Miss Trefoil, an
opinion which brought down much ridicule upon him from both
Hoffmann and Archibald Currie. But before that week was over,--in
the early days of April,--they were forced to retract their opinion
and to do honour to young Glossop's sagacity. Mounser Green was
engaged to Miss Trefoil, and for a day or two the Foreign Office
could talk of nothing else.

This is an atom: 
"A very handsome girl," said Lord Drummond to one of his
subordinates. "I met her at Mistletoe. As to that affair with Lord
Rufford, he treated her abominably." And when Mounser showed
himself at the office, which he did boldly, immediately after the
engagement was made known, they all received him with open arms and
congratulated him sincerely on his happy fortune. He himself was
quite contented with what he had done and thought that he was
taking out for himself the very wife for Patagonia.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XXII

This is an atom: 
The Wedding

This is an atom: 
No sooner did the new two lovers, Mounser Green and Arabella
Trefoil, understand each other, than they set their wits to work to
make the best of their natural advantages. The latter communicated
the fact in a very dry manner to her father and mother. Nothing was
to be got from them, and it was only just necessary that they
should know what she intended to do with herself. "My dear mamma. I
am to be married some time early in May to Mr. Mounser Green of the
Foreign Office. I don't think you know him, but I daresay you have
heard of him. He goes to Patagonia immediately after the wedding,
and I shall go with him. Your affectionate daughter, Arabella
Trefoil." That was all she said, and the letter to her father was
word for word the same. But how to make use of those friends who
were more happily circumstanced was matter for frequent counsel
between her and Mr. Green. In these days I do not think that she
concealed very much from him. To tell him all the little details of
her adventures with Lord Rufford would have been neither useful nor
pleasant; but, as to the chief facts, reticence would have been
foolish. To the statement that Lord Rufford had absolutely proposed
to her she clung fast, and really did believe it herself. That she
had been engaged to John Morton she did not deny; but she threw the
blame of that matter on her mother, and explained to him that she
had broken off the engagement down at Bragton, because she could
not bring herself to regard the man with sufficient personal
favour. Mounser was satisfied, but was very strong in urging her to
seek, yet once again, the favour of her magnificent uncle and her
magnificent aunt.

This is an atom: 
"What good can they do us?" said Arabella, who was almost afraid to
make the appeal.

This is an atom: 
"It would be everything for you to be married from Mistletoe," he
said. "People would know then that you were not blamed about Lord
Rufford. And it might serve me very much in my profession. These
things do help very much. It would cost us nothing, and the proper
kind of notice would then get into the newspapers. If you will
write direct to the Duchess I will get at the Duke through Lord
Drummond. They know where we are going, and that we are not likely
to want anything else for a long time."

This is an atom: 
"I don't think the Duchess would have mamma if it were ever so."

This is an atom: 
"Then we must drop your mother for the time;--that's all. When my
aunt hears that you are to be married from the Duke's, she will be
quite willing that you should remain with her till you go down to
Mistletoe."

This is an atom: 
Arabella, who perhaps knew a little more than her lover, could not
bring herself to believe that the appeal would be successful, but
she made it. It was a very difficult letter to write, as she could
not but allude to the rapid transference of her affections. "I will
not conceal from you," she said, "that I have suffered very much
from Lord Rufford's heartless conduct. My misery has been
aggravated by the feeling that you and my uncle will hardly believe
him to be so false, and will attribute part of the blame to me. I
had to undergo an agonizing revulsion of feeling, during which Mr.
Green's behaviour to me was at first so considerate and then so
kind that it has gone far to cure the wound from which I have been
suffering. He is so well known in reference to foreign affairs,
that I think my uncle cannot but have heard of him; my cousin
Mistletoe is certainly acquainted with him; and I think that you
cannot but approve of the match. You know what is the position of
my father and my mother, and how little able they are to give us
any assistance. If you would be kind enough to let us be married
from Mistletoe, you will confer on both of us a very, very great
favour." There was more of it, but that was the first of the
prayer, and most of the words given above came from the dictation
of Mounser himself. She had pleaded against making the direct
request, but he had assured her that in the world, as at present
arranged, the best way to get a thing is to ask for it. "You make
yourself at any rate understood," he said, "and you may be sure
that people who receive petitions do not feel the hardihood of them
so much as they who make them." Arabella, comforting herself by
declaring that the Duchess at any rate could not eat her, wrote the
letter and sent it.

This is an atom: 
The Duchess at first was most serious in her intention to refuse.
She was indeed made very angry by the request. Though it had been
agreed at Mistletoe that Lord Rufford had behaved badly, the
Duchess was thoroughly well aware that Arabella's conduct had been
abominable. Lord Rufford probably had made an offer, but it had
been extracted from him by the vilest of manoeuvres. The girl had
been personally insolent to herself. And this rapid change, this
third engagement within a few weeks, was disgusting to her as a
woman. But, unluckily for herself, she would not answer the letter
till she had consulted her husband. As it happened the Duke was in
town, and while he was there Lord Drummond got hold of him. Lord
Drummond had spoken very highly of Mounser Green, and the Duke, who
was never dead to the feeling that as the head of the family he
should always do what he could for the junior branches, had almost
made a promise. "I never take such things upon myself," he said,
"but if the Duchess has no objection, we will have them down to
Mistletoe."

This is an atom: 
"Of course if you wish it," said the Duchess,--with more acerbity
in her tone than the Duke had often heard there.

This is an atom: 
"Wish it? What do you mean by wishing it? It will be a great bore."

This is an atom: 
"Terrible!"

This is an atom: 
"But she is the only one there is and then we shall have done with
it."

This is an atom: 
"Done with it! They will be back from Patagonia before you can turn
yourself, and then of course we must have them here."

This is an atom: 
"Drummond tells me that Mr. Green is one of the most useful men
they have at the Foreign Office;--just the man that one ought to
give a lift to." Of course the Duke had his way. The Duchess could
not bring herself to write the letter, but the Duke wrote to his
dear niece saying that "they" would be very glad to see her, and
that if she would name the day proposed for the wedding, one should
be fixed for her visit to Mistletoe.

This is an atom: 
"You had better tell your mother and your father," Mounser said to
her.

This is an atom: 
"What's the use? The Duchess hates my mother, and my father never
goes near the place."

This is an atom: 
"Nevertheless tell them. People care a great deal for appearances."
She did as she was bid, and the result was that Lord Augustus and
his wife, on the occasion of their daughter's marriage, met each
other at Mistletoe,--for the first time for the last dozen years.

This is an atom: 
Before the day came round Arabella was quite astonished to find how
popular and fashionable her wedding was likely to be, and how the
world at large approved of what she was doing. The newspapers had
paragraphs about alliances and noble families, and all the
relatives sent tribute. There was a gold candlestick from the Duke,
a gilt dish from the Duchess,--which came however without a word of
personal congratulation,--and a gorgeous set of scent-bottles from
cousin Mistletoe. The Connop Greens were lavish with sapphires, the
De Brownes with pearls, and the Smijths with opal. Mrs. Gore sent a
huge carbuncle which Arabella strongly suspected to be glass. From
her paternal parent there came a pair of silver nut-crackers, and
from the maternal a second-hand dressing-case newly done up. Old
Mrs. Green gave her a couple of ornamental butter-boats, and
salt-cellars innumerable came from distant Greens. But there was a
diamond ring--with a single stone,--from a friend, without a name,
which she believed to be worth all the rest in money value. Should
she send it back to Lord Rufford, or make a gulp and swallow it?
How invincible must be the good-nature of the man when he could
send her such a present after such a rating as she had given him in
the park at Rufford! "Do as you like," Mounser Green said when she
consulted him.

This is an atom: 
She very much wished to keep it. "But what am I to say, and to
whom?"

This is an atom: 
"Write a note to the jewellers saying that you have got it." She
did write to the jeweller saying that she had got the ring,--"from
a friend;" and the ring with the other tribute went to Patagonia.
He had certainly behaved very badly to her, but she was quite sure
that he would never tell the story of the ring to any one. Perhaps
she thought that as she had spared him in the great matter of eight
thousand pounds, she was entitled to take this smaller contribution.

This is an atom: 
It was late in April when she went down to Mistletoe, the marriage
having been fixed for the 3rd of May. After that they were to spend
a fortnight in Paris, and leave England for Patagonia at the end of
the month. The only thing which Arabella dreaded was the meeting
with the Duchess. When that was once over she thought that she
could bear with equanimity all that could come after. The week
before her marriage could not be a pleasant week, but then she had
been accustomed to endure evil hours. Her uncle would be blandly
good-natured. Mistletoe, should he be there, would make civil
speeches to compensate for his indifference when called upon to
attack Lord Rufford. Other guests would tender to her the caressing
observance always shown to a bride. But as she got out of the ducal
carriage at the front door, her heart was uneasy at the coming
meeting.

This is an atom: 
The Duchess herself almost went to bed when the time came, so much
did she dread the same thing. She was quite alone, having felt that
she could not bring herself to give the affectionate embrace which
the presence of others would require. She stood in the middle of
the room and then came forward three steps to meet the bride.
"Arabella," she said, "I am very glad that everything has been
settled so comfortably for you."

This is an atom: 
"That is so kind of you, aunt," said Arabella, who was watching the
Duchess closely,--ready to jump into her aunt's arms if required to
do so, or to stand quite aloof.

This is an atom: 
Then the Duchess signified her pleasure that her cheek should be
touched,--and it was touched. "Mrs. Pepper will show you your room.
It is the same you had when you were here before. Perhaps you know
that Mr. Green comes down to Stamford on the first, and that he
will dine here on that day and on Sunday."

This is an atom: 
"That will be very nice. He had told me how it was arranged."

This is an atom: 
"It seems that he knows one of the clergymen in Stamford, and will
stay at his house. Perhaps you will like to go upstairs now."

This is an atom: 
That was all there was, and that had not been very bad. During the
entire week the Duchess hardly spoke to her another word, and
certainly did not speak to her a word in private. Arabella now
could go where she pleased without any danger of meeting her aunt
on her walks. When Sunday came nobody asked her to go to church.
She did go twice, Mounser Green accompanying her to the morning
service;--but there was no restraint. The Duchess only thought of
her as a disagreeable ill-conducted incubus, who luckily was about
to be taken away to Patagonia.

This is an atom: 
It had been settled on all sides that the marriage was to be very
quiet. The bride was of course consulted about her bridesmaids, as
to whom there was a little difficulty. But a distant Trefoil was
found willing to act, in payment for the unaccustomed invitation to
Mistletoe, and one Connop Green young lady, with one De Browne
young lady, and one Smijth young lady came on the same terms.
Arabella herself was surprised at the ease with which it was all
done. On the Saturday Lady Augustus came, and on the Sunday Lord
Augustus. The parents of course kissed their child, but there was
very little said in the way either of congratulation or farewell.
Lord Augustus did have some conversation with Mounser Green, but it
all turned on the probability of there being whist in Patagonia. On
the Monday morning they were married, and then Arabella was taken
off by the happy bridegroom.

This is an atom: 
When the ceremony was over it was expected that Lady Augustus
should take herself away as quickly as possible, not perhaps on
that very afternoon, but at any rate, on the next morning. As soon
as the carriage was gone, she went to her own room and wept
bitterly. It was all done now. Everything was over. Though she had
quarrelled daily with her daughter for the last twelve years,--to
such an extent lately that no decently civil word ever passed
between them,--still there had been something to interest her.
There had been something to fear and something to hope. The girl
had always had some prospect before her, more or less brilliant.
Her life had had its occupation, and future triumph was possible.
Now it was all over. The link by which she had been bound to the
world was broken. The Connop Greens and the Smijths would no longer
have her, unless it might be on short and special occasions, as a
great favour. She knew that she was an old woman, without money,
without blood, and without attraction, whom nobody would ever again
desire to see. She had her things packed up, and herself taken off
to London, almost without a word of farewell to the Duchess,
telling herself as she went that the world had produced no other
people so heartless as the family of the Trefoils.

This is an atom: 
"I wonder what you will think of Patagonia," said Mounser Green as
he took his bride away.

This is an atom: 
"I don't suppose I shall think much. As far as I can see one place
is always like another."

This is an atom: 
"But then you will have duties."

This is an atom: 
"Not very heavy I hope."

This is an atom: 
Then he preached her a sermon, expressing a hope as he went on,
that as she was leaving the pleasures of life behind her, she would
learn to like the work of life. "I have found the pleasures very
hard," she said. He spoke to her of the companion he hoped to find,
of the possible children who might be dependent on their mother, of
the position which she would hold, and of the manner in which she
should fill it. She, as she listened to him, was almost stunned by
the change in the world around her. She need never again seem to be
gay in order that men might be attracted. She made her promises and
made them with an intention of keeping them; but it may, we fear,
be doubted whether he was justified in expecting that he could get
a wife fit for his purpose out of the school in which Arabella
Trefoil had been educated. The two, however, will pass out of our
sight, and we can only hope that he may not be disappointed.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XXIII

This is an atom: 
The Senator's Lecture.--No. I

This is an atom: 
Wednesday, April 14th, was the day at last fixed for the Senator's
lecture. His little proposal to set England right on all those
matters in which she had hitherto gone astray had created a
considerable amount of attention. The Goarly affair with the
subsequent trial of Scrobby had been much talked about, and the
Senator's doings in reference to it had been made matter of comment
in the newspapers. Some had praised him for courage, benevolence,
and a steadfast purpose. Others had ridiculed his inability to
understand manners different from those of his own country. He had
seen a good deal of society both in London and in the country, and
had never hesitated to express his opinions with an audacity which
some had called insolence. When he had trodden with his whole
weight hard down on individual corns, of course he had given
offence,--as on the memorable occasion of the dinner at the
parson's house in Dillsborough. But, on the whole, he had produced
for himself a general respect among educated men which was not
diminished by the fact that he seemed to count quite as little on
that as on the ill-will and abuse of others. For some days previous
to the delivery of the lecture the hoardings in London were crowded
with sesquipedalian notices of the entertainment, so that Senator
Gotobed's great oration on "The irrationality of Englishmen" was
looked to with considerable interest.

This is an atom: 
When an intelligent Japanese travels in Great Britain or an
intelligent Briton in Japan, he is struck with no wonder at
national differences. He is on the other hand rather startled to
find how like his strange brother is to him in many things. Crime
is persecuted, wickedness is condoned, and goodness treated with
indifference in both countries. Men care more for what they eat
than anything else, and combine a closely defined idea of meum with
a lax perception as to tuum. Barring a little difference of
complexion and feature the Englishman would make a good Japanese,
or the Japanese a first-class Englishman. But when an American
comes to us or a Briton goes to the States, each speaking the same
language, using the same cookery, governed by the same laws, and
wearing the same costume, the differences which present themselves
are so striking that neither can live six months in the country of
the other without a holding up of the hands and a torrent of
exclamations. And in nineteen cases out of twenty the surprise and
the ejaculations take the place of censure. The intelligence of the
American, displayed through the nose, worries the Englishman. The
unconscious self-assurance of the Englishman, not always
unaccompanied by a sneer, irritates the American. They meet as
might a lad from Harrow and another from Mr. Brumby's successful
mechanical cramming establishment. The Harrow boy cannot answer a
question, but is sure that he is the proper thing, and is ready to
face the world on that assurance. Mr. Brumby's paragon is shocked
at the other's inaptitude for examination, but is at the same time
tortured by envy of he knows not what. In this spirit we Americans
and Englishmen go on writing books about each other, sometimes with
bitterness enough, but generally with good final results. But in
the meantime there has sprung up a jealousy which makes each
inclined to hate the other at first sight. Hate is difficult and
expensive, and between individuals soon gives place to love. "I
cannot bear Americans as a rule, though I have been very lucky
myself with a few friends." Who in England has not heard that form
of speech, over and over again? And what Englishman has travelled
in the States without hearing abuse of all English institutions
uttered amidst the pauses of a free-handed hospitality which has
left him nothing to desire?

This is an atom: 
Mr. Senator Gotobed had expressed his mind openly wheresoever he
went, but, being a man of immense energy, was not content with such
private utterances. He could not liberate his soul without doing
something in public to convince his cousins that in their general
practices of life they were not guided by reason. He had no object
of making money. To give him his due we must own that he had no
object of making fame. He was impelled by that intense desire to
express himself which often amounts to passion with us, and
sometimes to fury with Americans, and he hardly considered much
what reception his words might receive. It was only when he was
told by others that his lecture might give offence which possibly
would turn to violence, that he made inquiry as to the attendance
of the police. But though they should tear him to pieces he would
say what he had to say. It should not be his fault if the
absurdities of a people whom he really loved were not exposed to
light, so that they might be acknowledged and abandoned.

This is an atom: 
He had found time to travel to Birmingham, to Manchester, to
Liverpool, to Glasgow, and to other places, and really thought that
he had mastered his great subject. He had worked very hard, but was
probably premature in thinking that he knew England thoroughly. He
had, however, undoubtedly dipped into a great many matters, and
could probably have told many Englishmen much that they didn't know
about their own affairs. He had poked his nose everywhere, and had
scrupled to ask no question. He had seen the miseries of a casual
ward, the despair of an expiring strike, the amenities of a city
slum, and the stolid apathy of a rural labourer's home. He had
measured the animal food consumed by the working classes, and knew
the exact amount of alcohol swallowed by the average Briton. He had
seen also the luxury of baronial halls, the pearl-drinking
extravagances of commercial palaces, the unending labours of our
pleasure-seekers--as with Lord Rufford, and the dullness of
ordinary country life--as experienced by himself at Bragton. And
now he was going to tell the English people at large what he
thought about it all.

This is an atom: 
The great room at St. James's Hall had been secured for the
occasion, and Lord Drummond, the Minister of State in foreign
affairs, had been induced to take the chair. In these days our
governments are very anxious to be civil to foreigners, and there
is nothing that a robust Secretary of State will not do for them.
On the platform there were many members of both Houses of
Parliament, and almost everybody connected with the Foreign Office.
Every ticket had been taken for weeks since. The front benches were
filled with the wives and daughters of those on the platform, and
back behind, into the distant spaces in which seeing was difficult
and hearing impossible, the crowd was gathered at 2s. 6d. a head,
all of which was going to some great British charity. From
half-past seven to eight Piccadilly and Regent Street were crammed,
and when the Senator came himself with his chairman he could hardly
make his way in at the doors. A great treat was expected, but there
was among the officers of police some who thought that a portion of
the audience would not bear quietly the hard things that would be
said, and that there was an uncanny gathering of roughs about the
street, who were not prepared to be on their best behaviour when
they should be told that old England was being abused.

This is an atom: 
Lord Drummond opened the proceedings by telling the audience, in a
voice clearly audible to the reporters and the first half-dozen
benches, that they had come there to hear what a well-informed and
distinguished foreigner thought of their country. They would not,
he was sure, expect to be flattered. Than flattery nothing was more
useless or ignoble. This gentleman, coming from a new country, in
which tradition was of no avail, and on which the customs of former
centuries had had no opportunities to engraft themselves, had seen
many things here which, in his eyes, could not justify themselves
by reason. Lord Drummond was a little too prolix for a chairman,
and at last concluded by expressing "his conviction that his
countrymen would listen to the distinguished Senator with that
courtesy which was due to a foreigner and due also to the great and
brotherly nation from which he had come."

This is an atom: 
Then the Senator rose, and the clapping of hands and kicking of
heels was most satisfactory. There was at any rate no prejudice at
the onset. "English Ladies and Gentlemen," he said, "I am in the
unenviable position of having to say hard things to you for about
an hour and a half together, if I do not drive you from your seats
before my lecture is done. And this is the more the pity because I
could talk to you for three hours about your country and not say an
unpleasant word. His Lordship has told you that flattery is not my
purpose. Neither is praise, which would not be flattery. Why should
I collect three or four thousand people here to tell them of
virtues the consciousness of which is the inheritance of each of
them? You are brave and generous,--and you are lovely to look at,
with sweetly polished manners; but you know all that quite well
enough without my telling you. But it strikes me that you do not
know how little prone you are to admit the light of reason into
either your public or private life, and how generally you allow
yourselves to be guided by traditions, prejudices, and customs
which should be obsolete. If you will consent to listen to what one
foreigner thinks,--though he himself be a man of no account,--you
may perchance gather from his words something of the opinion of
bystanders in general, and so be able, perhaps a little, to rectify
your gait and your costume and the tones of your voice, as we are
all apt to do when we come from our private homes, out among the
eyes of the public."

This is an atom: 
This was received very well. The Senator spoke with a clear,
sonorous voice, no doubt with a twang, but so audibly as to satisfy
the room in general. "I shall not," he said, "dwell much on your
form of government. Were I to praise a republic I might seem to
belittle your throne and the lady who sits on it,--an offence which
would not be endured for a moment by English ears. I will take the
monarchy as it is, simply remarking that its recondite forms are
very hard to be understood by foreigners, and that they seem to me
to be for the most part equally dark to natives. I have hardly as
yet met two Englishmen who were agreed as to the political power of
the sovereign; and most of those of whom I have enquired have
assured me that the matter is one as to which they have not found
it worth their while to make inquiry." Here a voice from the end of
the hall made some protestation, but the nature of the protest did
not reach the platform.

This is an atom: 
"But," continued the Senator, now rising into energy, "tho' I will
not meddle with your form of government, I may, I hope, be allowed
to allude to the political agents by which it is conducted. You are
proud of your Parliament."

This is an atom: 
"We are," said a voice.

This is an atom: 
"I wonder of which house. I do not ask the question that it may be
answered, because it is advisable at the present moment that there
should be only one speaker. That labour is, unfortunately for me,
at present in my hands, and I am sure you will agree with me that
it should not be divided. You mean probably that you are proud of
your House of Commons,--and that you are so because it speaks with
the voice of the people. The voice of the people, in order that it
may be heard without unjust preponderance on this side or on that,
requires much manipulation. That manipulation has in latter years
been effected by your Reform bills of which during the last half
century there have in fact been four or five,--the latter in favour
of the ballot having been perhaps the greatest. There have been
bills for purity of elections, very necessary; bills for creating
constituencies, bills for abolishing them, bills for dividing them,
bills for extending the suffrage, and bills, if I am not mistaken,
for curtailing it. And what has been the result? How many men are
there in this room who know the respective nature of their votes?
And is there a single woman who knows the political worth of her
husband's vote? Passing the other day from the Bank of this great
metropolis to its suburb called Brentford, journeying as I did the
whole way through continuous rows of houses, I found myself at
first in a very ancient borough returning four members,--double the
usual number,--not because of its population but because it has
always been so. Here I was informed that the residents had little
or nothing to do with it. I was told, though I did not quite
believe what I heard, that there were no residents. The voters
however, at any rate the influential voters, never pass a night
there, and combine their city franchise with franchises elsewhere.
I then went through two enormous boroughs, one so old as to have a
great political history of its own, and the other so new as to have
none. It did strike me as odd that there should be a new borough,
with new voters, and new franchises, not yet ten years old, in the
midst of this city of London. But when I came to Brentford,
everything was changed. I was not in a town at all though I was
surrounded on all sides by houses. Everything around me was grim
and dirty enough, but I am supposed to have reached, politically,
the rustic beauties of the country. Those around me, who had votes,
voted for the County of Middlesex. On the other side of the
invisible border I had just past the poor wretch with 3s. a day who
lived in a grimy lodging or a half-built hut, but who at any rate
possessed the political privilege. Now I had suddenly emerged among
the aristocrats, and quite another state of things prevailed. Is
that a reasonable manipulation of the votes of the people? Does
that arrangement give to any man an equal share in his country? And
yet I fancy that the thing is so little thought of that few among
you are aware that in this way the largest class of British labour
is excluded from the franchise in a country which boasts of equal
representation."

This is an atom: 
"The chief object of your first Reform Bill was that of realising
the very fact of representation. Up to that time your members of
the House of Commons were in truth deputies of the Lords or of
other rich men. Lord A, or Mr. B, or perhaps Lady C, sent whom she
pleased to Parliament to represent this or that town, or
occasionally this or that county. That absurdity is supposed to be
past, and on evils that have been cured no one should dwell. But
how is it now? I have a list, in my memory, for I would not care to
make out so black a catalogue in legible letters,--of forty members
who have been returned to the present House of Commons by the
single voices of influential persons. What will not forty voices do
even in your Parliament? And if I can count forty, how many more
must there be of which I have not heard?" Then there was a voice
calling upon the Senator to name those men, and other voices
denying the fact. "I will name no one," said the Senator. "How
could I tell what noble friend I might put on a stool of repentance
by doing so." And he looked round on the gentlemen on the platform
behind him. "But I defy any member of Parliament here present to
get up and say that it is not so." Then he paused a moment. "And if
it be so, is that rational? Is that in accordance with the theory
of representation as to which you have all been so ardent, and
which you profess to be so dear to you? Is the country not
over-ridden by the aristocracy when Lord Lambswool not only
possesses his own hereditary seat in the House of Lords, but also
has a seat for his eldest son in the House of Commons?"

This is an atom: 
Then a voice from the back called out, "What the deuce is all that
to you?"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XXIV

This is an atom: 
The Senator's Lecture.--No. II

This is an atom: 
"If I see a man hungry in the street," said the Senator, instigated
by the question asked him at the end of the last chapter, "and give
him a bit of bread, I don't do it for my own sake but for his." Up
to this time the Britishers around him on the platform and those in
the benches near to him, had received what he said with a good
grace. The allusion to Lord Lambswool had not been pleasant to
them, but it had not been worse than they had expected. But now
they were displeased. They did not like being told that they were
taking a bit of bread from him in their own political destitution.
They did not like that he, an individual, should presume that he
had prayer to offer to them as a nation. And yet, had they argued
it out in their own minds, they would have seen that the Senator's
metaphor was appropriate. His purpose in being there was to give
advice, and theirs in coming to listen to it. But it was
unfortunate. "When I ventured to come before you here, I made all
this my business," continued the Senator. Then he paused and
glanced round the hall with a defiant look. "And now about your
House of Lords," he went on. "I have not much to say about the
House of Lords, because if I understand rightly the feeling of this
country it is already condemned." "No such thing." "Who told you
that?" "You know nothing about it" These and other words of curt
denial came from the distant corners, and a slight murmur of
disapprobation was heard even from the seats on the platform. Then
Lord Drummond got up and begged that there might be silence. Mr.
Gotobed had come there to tell them his views,--and as they had
come there expressly to listen to him, they could not without
impropriety interrupt him. "That such will be the feeling of the
country before long," continued the Senator, "I think no one can
doubt who has learned how to look to the signs of the times in such
matters. Is it possible that the theory of an hereditary
legislature can be defended with reason? For a legislature you want
the best and wisest of your people." "You don't get them in
America," said a voice which was beginning to be recognised. "We
try at any rate," said the Senator. "Now is it possible that an
accident of birth should give you excellence and wisdom? What is
the result? Not a tenth of your hereditary legislators assemble in
the beautiful hall that you have built for them. And of that tenth
the greater half consists of counsellors of state who have been
placed there in order that the business of the country may not be
brought to a standstill. Your hereditary chamber is a fiction
supplemented by the element of election, the election resting
generally in the very bosom of the House of Commons." On this
subject, although he had promised to be short, he said much more,
which was received for the most part in silence. But when he ended
by telling them that they could have no right to call themselves a
free people till every legislator in the country was elected by the
votes of the people, another murmur was heard through the hall.

This is an atom: 
"I told you," said he waxing more and more energetic, as he felt
the opposition which he was bound to overcome, "that what I had to
say to you would not be pleasant. If you cannot endure to hear me,
let us break up and go away. In that case I must tell my friends at
home that the tender ears of a British audience cannot bear rough
words from American lips. And yet if you think of it we have borne
rough words from you and have borne them with good-humour." Again
he paused, but as none rose from their seats he went on,
"Proceeding from hereditary legislature I come to hereditary
property. It is natural that a man should wish to give to his
children after his death the property which he has enjoyed during
their life. But let me ask any man here who has not been born an
eldest son himself, whether it is natural that he should wish to
give it all to one son. Would any man think of doing so, by the
light of his own reason,--out of his own head as we say? Would any
man be so unjust to those who are equal in his love, where he not
constrained by law, and by custom more iron-handed even than the
law?" The Senator had here made a mistake very common with
Americans, and a great many voices were on him at once. "What law?"
"There is no law." "You know nothing about it" "Go back and learn."

This is an atom: 
"What!" cried the Senator coming forward to the extreme verge of
the platform and putting down his foot as though there were
strength enough in his leg to crush them all; "Will any one have
the hardihood to tell me that property in this country is not
affected by primogeniture?" "Go back and learn the law." "I know
the law perhaps better than most of you. Do you mean to assert that
my Lord Lambswool can leave his land to whom he pleases? I tell you
that he has no more than a life-interest in it, and that his son
will only have the same." Then an eager Briton on the platform got
up and whispered to the Senator for a few minutes, during which the
murmuring was continued. "My friend reminds me," said the Senator,
"that the matter is one of custom rather than law; and I am obliged
to him. But the custom which is damnable and cruel, is backed by
law which is equally so. If I have land I can not only give it all
to my eldest son, but I can assure the right of primogeniture to
his son, though he be not yet born. No one I think will deny that
there must be a special law to enable me to commit an injustice so
unnatural as that."

This is an atom: 
"Hence it comes that you still suffer under an aristocracy almost
as dominant, and in its essence as irrational, as that which
created feudalism." The gentlemen collected on the platform looked
at each other and smiled, perhaps failing to catch the exact
meaning of the Senator's words. "A lord here has a power, as a
lord, which he cannot himself fathom and of which he daily makes an
unconscious but most deleterious use. He is brought up to think it
natural that he should be a tyrant. The proclivities of his order
are generous, and as a rule he gives more than he takes. But he is
as injurious in the one process as in the other. Your ordinary
Briton in his dealing with a lord expects payment in some shape for
every repetition of the absurd title;--and payment is made. The
titled aristocrat pays dearer for his horse, dearer for his coat,
dearer for his servant than other people. But in return he exacts
much which no other person can get. Knowing his own magnanimity he
expects that his word shall not be questioned. If I may be allowed
I will tell a little story as to one of the most generous men I
have had the happiness of meeting in this country, which will
explain my meaning."

This is an atom: 
Then, without mentioning names he told the story of Lord Rufford,
Goarly, and Scrobby, in such a way as partly to redeem himself with
his audience. He acknowledged how absolutely he had been himself
befooled, and how he had been done out of his money by misplaced
sympathy. He made Mrs. Goarly's goose immortal, and in imitating
the indignation of Runce the farmer and Bean the gamekeeper showed
that he was master of considerable humour. But he brought it all
round at last to his own purpose, and ended this episode of his
lecture by his view of the absurdity and illegality of British
hunting. "I can talk about it to you," he said, "and you will know
whether I am speaking the truth. But when I get home among my own
people, and repeat my lecture there, as I shall do,--with some
little additions as to the good things I have found here from which
your ears may be spared,--I shall omit this story as I know it will
be impossible to make my countrymen believe that a hundred
harum-scarum tomboys may ride at their pleasure over every man's
land, destroying crops and trampling down fences, going, if their
vermin leads them there, with reckless violence into the sweet
domestic garden of your country residences; and that no one can
either stop them or punish them! An American will believe much about
the wonderful ways of his British cousin, but no American will be
got to believe that till he sees it."

This is an atom: 
"I find," said he, "that this irrationality, as I have ventured to
call it, runs through all your professions. We will take the Church
as being the highest at any rate in its objects." Then he
recapitulated all those arguments against our mode of dispensing
church patronage with which the reader is already familiar if he
has attended to the Senator's earlier words as given in this
chronicle. "In other lines of business there is, even here in
England, some attempt made to get the man best suited for the work
he has to do. If any one wants a domestic servant he sets about the
work of getting a proper person in a very determined manner indeed.
But for the care,--or, as you call it, the cure,--of his soul, he
has to put up with the man who has bought the right to minister to
his wants; or with him whose father wants a means of living for his
younger son,--the elder being destined to swallow all the family
property; or with him who has become sick of drinking his wine in
an Oxford college;--or with him, again, who has pleaded his cause
successfully with a bishop's daughter." It is not often that the
British public is angered by abuse of the Church, and this part of
the lecture was allowed to pass without strong marks of
disapprobation.

This is an atom: 
"I have been at some trouble," he continued, "to learn the very
complex rules by which your army is now regulated, and those by
which it was regulated a very short time since. Unhappily for me I
have found it in a state of transition, and nothing is so difficult
to a stranger's comprehension as a transition state of affairs. But
this I can see plainly; that every improvement which is made is
received by those whom it most concerns with a horror which amounts
almost to madness. So lovely to the ancient British, well-born,
feudal instinct is a state of unreason, that the very absence of
any principle endears to it institutions which no one can attempt
to support by argument. Had such a thing not existed as the right
to purchase military promotion, would any satirist have been
listened to who had suggested it as a possible outcome of British
irrationality? Think what it carries with it! The man who has
proved himself fit to serve his country by serving it in twenty
foreign fields, who has bled for his country and perhaps preserved
his country, shall rot in obscurity because he has no money to buy
promotion, whereas the young dandy who has done no more than
glitter along the pavements with his sword and spurs shall have the
command of men;--because he has so many thousand dollars in his
pocket"

This is an atom: 
"Buncombe," shouted the inimical voice.

This is an atom: 
"But is it Buncombe?" asked the intrepid Senator. "Will any one who
knows what he is talking about say that I am describing a state of
things which did not exist yesterday? I will acknowledge that this
has been rectified,--tho' I see symptoms of relapse. A fault that
has been mended is a fault no longer. But what I speak of now is
the disruption of all concord in your army caused by the reform
which has forced itself upon you. All loyalty has gone; all that
love of his profession which should be the breath of a soldier's
nostrils. A fine body of fighting heroes is broken-hearted, not
because injury has been done to them or to any of them, but because
the system had become peculiarly British by reason of its special
absurdity, and therefore peculiarly dear."

This is an atom: 
"Buncombe," again said the voice, and the word was now repeated by
a dozen voices.

This is an atom: 
"Let any one show me that it is Buncombe. If I say what is untrue,
do with me what you please. If I am ignorant, set me right and
laugh at me. But if what I say is true, then your interruption is
surely a sign of imbecility. I say that the change was forced upon
you by the feeling of the people, but that its very expediency has
demoralized the army, because the army was irrational. And how is
it with the navy? What am I to believe when I hear so many
conflicting statements among yourselves?" During this last appeal,
however, the noise at the back of the hall had become so violent,
that the Senator was hardly able to make his voice heard by those
immediately around him. He himself did not quail for a moment,
going on with his gestures, and setting down his foot as though he
were still confident in his purpose of overcoming all opposition.
He had not much above half done yet. There were the lawyers before
him, and the Civil Service, and the railways, and the commerce of
the country, and the labouring classes. But Lord Drummond and
others near him were becoming terrified, thinking that something
worse might occur unless an end was put to the proceedings. Then a
superintendent of police came in and whispered to his Lordship. A
crowd was collecting itself in Piccadilly and St. James Street, and
perhaps the Senator had better be withdrawn. The officer did not
think that he could safely answer for the consequences if this were
carried on for a quarter of an hour longer. Then Lord Drummond
having meditated for a moment, touched the Senator's arm and
suggested a withdrawal into a side room for a minute. "Mr.
Gotobed," he said, "a little feeling has been excited and we had
better put an end to this for the present."

This is an atom: 
"Put an end to it?"

This is an atom: 
"I am afraid we must. The police are becoming alarmed."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, of course; you know best. In our country a man is allowed to
express himself unless he utters either blasphemy or calumny. But I
am in your hands and of course you must do as you please." Then he
sat down in a corner, and wiped his brows. Lord Drummond returned
to the hall, and there endeavoured to explain that the lecture was
over for that night. The row was so great that it did not matter
much what he said, but the people soon understood that the American
Senator was not to appear before them again.

This is an atom: 
It was not much after nine o'clock when the Senator reached his
hotel, Lord Drummond having accompanied him thither in a cab. "Good
night, Mr. Gotobed," said his Lordship. "I cannot tell you how much
I respect both your purpose and your courage;--but I don't know how
far it is wise for a man to tell any other man, much less a nation,
of all his faults."

This is an atom: 
"You English tell us of ours pretty often," said the Senator.

This is an atom: 
When he found himself alone he thought of it all, giving himself no
special credit for what he had done, acknowledging to himself that
he had often chosen his words badly and expressed himself
imperfectly, but declaring to himself through it all that the want
of reason among Britishers was so great, that no one ought to treat
them as wholly responsible beings.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XXV

This is an atom: 
The Last Days of Mary Masters

This is an atom: 
The triumph of Mary Masters was something more than a nine days'
wonder to the people of Dillsborough. They had all known Larry
Twentyman's intentions and aspirations, and had generally condemned
the young lady's obduracy, thinking, and not being slow to say,
that she would live to repent her perversity. Runciman who had a
thoroughly warm-hearted friendship for both the attorney and Larry
had sometimes been very severe on Mary. "She wants a touch of
hardship," he would say, "to bring her to. If Larry would just give
her a cold shoulder for six months, she'd be ready to jump into his
arms." And Dr. Nupper had been heard to remark that she might go
farther and fare worse. "If it were my girl I'd let her know all
about it," Ribbs the butcher had said in the bosom of his own
family. When it was found that Mr. Surtees the curate was not to be
the fortunate man, the matter was more inexplicable than ever. Had
it then been declared that the owner of Hoppet Hall had proposed to
her, all these tongues would have been silenced, and the refusal
even of Larry Twentyman would have been justified. But what was to
be said and what was to be thought when it was known that she was
to be the mistress of Bragton? For a day or two the prosperity of
the attorney was hardly to be endured by his neighbours. When it
was first known that the stewardship of the property was to go back
into his hands, his rise in the world was for a time slightly
prejudicial to his popularity; but this greater stroke of luck,
this latter promotion which would place him so much higher in
Dillsborough than even his father or his grandfather had ever been,
was a great trial of friendship.

***************************************************************************