Document Name: /part1/suspicious-document01184.txt
Atom_Type: paragraph
Cluster_Method: combine_confidences
Plagiarized Atoms Count: 11/11
Non-Plagiarized Atoms Count: 0/11

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NON-PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is an atom: 
ï»¿from the 1864 Chapman and Hall "Tales of all Countries" edition.

This is an atom: 
THE HOUSE OF HEINE BROTHERS, IN MUNICH

This is an atom: 
by Anthony Trollope

This is an atom: 
The house of Heine Brothers, in Munich, was of good repute at the
time of which I am about to tell,--a time not long ago; and is so
still, I trust.  It was of good repute in its own way, seeing that
no man doubted the word or solvency of Heine Brothers; but they did
not possess, as bankers, what would in England be considered a large
or profitable business.  The operations of English bankers are
bewildering in their magnitude.  Legions of clerks are employed.
The senior book-keepers, though only salaried servants, are
themselves great men; while the real partners are inscrutable,
mysterious, opulent beyond measure, and altogether unknown to their
customers.  Take any firm at random,--Brown, Jones, and Cox, let us
say,--the probability is that Jones has been dead these fifty years,
that Brown is a Cabinet Minister, and that Cox is master of a pack
of hounds in Leicestershire.  But it was by no means so with the
house of Heine Brothers, of Munich.  There they were, the two
elderly men, daily to be seen at their dingy office in the Schrannen
Platz; and if any business was to be transacted requiring the
interchange of more than a word or two, it was the younger brother
with whom the customer was, as a matter of course, brought into
contact.  There were three clerks in the establishment; an old man,
namely, who sat with the elder brother and had no personal dealings
with the public; a young Englishman, of whom we shall anon hear
more; and a boy who ran messages, put the wood on to the stoves, and
swept out the bank.  Truly he house of Heine Brothers was of no
great importance; but nevertheless it was of good repute.

This is an atom: 
The office, I have said, was in the Schrannen Platz, or old Market-
place.  Munich, as every one knows, is chiefly to be noted as a new
town,--so new that many of the streets and most of the palaces look
as though they had been sent home last night from the builders, and
had only just been taken out of their bandboxes It is angular,
methodical, unfinished, and palatial.  But there is an old town;
and, though the old town be not of surpassing interest, it is as
dingy, crooked, intricate, and dark as other old towns in Germany.
Here, in the old Market-place, up one long broad staircase, were
situated the two rooms in which was held the bank of Heine Brothers.

This is an atom: 
Of the elder member of the firm we shall have something to say
before this story be completed.  He was an old bachelor, and was
possessed of a bachelor's dwelling somewhere out in the suburbs of
the city.  The junior brother was a married man, with a wife some
twenty years younger than himself, with two daughters, the elder of
whom was now one-and-twenty, and one son.  His name was Ernest
Heine, whereas the senior brother was known as Uncle Hatto.  Ernest
Heine and his wife inhabited a portion of one of those new palatial
residences at the further end of the Ludwigs Strasse; but not
because they thus lived must it be considered that they were
palatial people.  By no means let it be so thought, as such an idea
would altogether militate against whatever truth of character
painting there may be in this tale.  They were not palatial people,
but the very reverse, living in homely guise, pursuing homely
duties, and satisfied with homely pleasures.  Up two pairs of
stairs, however, in that street of palaces, they lived, having there
a commodious suite of large rooms, furnished, after the manner of
the Germans, somewhat gaudily as regarded their best salon, and with
somewhat meagre comfort as regarded their other rooms.  But, whether
in respect of that which was meagre, or whether in respect of that
which was gaudy, they were as well off as their neighbours; and
this, as I take it, is the point of excellence which is desirable.

This is an atom: 
Ernest Heine was at this time over sixty; his wife was past forty;
and his eldest daughter, as I have said, was twenty-one years of
age.  His second child, also a girl, was six years younger; and
their third child, a boy, had not been born till another similar
interval had elapsed.  He was named Hatto after his uncle, and the
two girls had been christened Isa and Agnes.  Such, in number and
mode of life, was the family of the Heines.

This is an atom: 
We English folk are apt to imagine that we are nearer akin to
Germans than to our other continental neighbours.  This may be so in
blood, but, nevertheless, the difference in manners is so striking,
that it could hardly be enhanced.  An Englishman moving himself off
to a city in the middle of Central America will find the customs to
which he must adapt himself less strange to him there, than he would
in many a German town.  But in no degree of life is the difference
more remarkable than among unmarried but marriageable young women.
It is not my purpose at the present moment to attribute a
superiority in this matter to either nationality.  Each has its own
charm, its own excellence, its own Heaven-given grace, whereby men
are led up to purer thoughts and sweet desires; and each may
possibly have its own defect.  I will not here describe the
excellence or defect of either; but will, if it be in my power, say
a word as to this difference.  The German girl of one-and-twenty,--
our Isa's age,--is more sedate, more womanly, more meditative than
her English sister.  The world's work is more in her thoughts, and
the world's amusements less so.  She probably knows less of those
things which women learn than the English girl, but that which she
does know is nearer to her hand for use.  She is not so much
accustomed to society, but nevertheless she is more mistress of her
own manner.  She is not taught to think so much of those things
which flurry and disturb the mind, and therefore she is seldom
flurried and disturbed.  To both of them, love,--the idea of love,--
must be the thought of all the most absorbing; for is it not fated
for them that the joys and sorrows of their future life must depend
upon it?  But the idea of the German girl is the more realistic, and
the less romantic.  Poetry and fiction she may have read, though of
the latter sparingly; but they will not have imbued her with that
hope for some transcendental paradise of affection which so often
fills and exalts the hearts of our daughters here at home.  She is
moderate in her aspirations, requiring less excitement than an
English girl; and never forgetting the solid necessities of life,--
as they are so often forgotten here in England.  In associating with
young men, an English girl will always remember that in each one she
so meets she may find an admirer whom she may possibly love, or an
admirer whom she may probably be called on to repel.  She is ever
conscious of the fact of this position; and a romance is thus
engendered which, if it may at times be dangerous, is at any rate
always charming.  But the German girl, in her simplicity, has no
such consciousness.  As you and I, my reader, might probably become
dear friends were we to meet and know each other, so may the German
girl learn to love the fair-haired youth with whom chance has for a
time associated her; but to her mind there occurs no suggestive
reason why it should be so,--no probability that the youth may
regard her in such light, because that chance has come to pass.  She
can therefore give him her hand without trepidation, and talk with
him for half an hour, when called on to do so, as calmly as she
might do with his sister.

This is an atom: 
Such a one was Isa Heine at the time of which I am writing.  We
English, in our passion for daily excitement, might call her
phlegmatic, but we should call her so unjustly.  Life to her was a
serious matter, of which the daily duties and daily wants were
sufficient to occupy her thoughts.  She was her mother's companion,
the instructress of both her brother and her sister, and the charm
of her father's vacant hours.  With such calls upon her time, and so
many realities around her, her imagination did not teach her to look
for joys beyond those of her present life and home.  When love and
marriage should come to her, as come they probably might, she would
endeavour to attune herself to a new happiness and a new sphere of
duties.  In the meantime she was contented to keep her mother's
accounts, and look after her brother and sister up two pair of
stairs in the Ludwigs Strasse.  But change would certainly come, we
may prophesy; for Isa Heine was a beautiful girl, tall and graceful,
comely to the eye, and fit in every way to be loved and cherished as
the partner of a man's home.

This is an atom: 
I have said that an English clerk made a part of that small
establishment in the dingy banking-office in the Schrannen Platz,
and I must say a word or two of Herbert Onslow.  In his early career
he had not been fortunate.  His father, with means sufficiently
moderate, and with a family more than sufficiently large, had sent
him to a public school at which he had been very idle, and then to
one of the universities, at which he had run into debt, and had
therefore left without a degree.  When this occurred, a family
council of war had been held among the Onslows, and it was decided
that Herbert should be sent off to the banking-house of Heines, at
Munich, there being a cousinship between the families, and some
existing connections of business.

This is an atom: 
It was, therefore, so settled; and Herbert, willing enough to see
the world,--as he considered he should do by going to Munich,--
started for his German home, with injunctions, very tender from his
mother, and very solemn from his aggrieved father.  But there was
nothing bad at the heart about young Onslow, and if the solemn
father had well considered it, he might perhaps have felt that those
debts at Cambridge reflected more fault on him than on his son.
When Herbert arrived at Munich, his cousins, the Heines,--far-away
cousins though they were,--behaved kindly to him.  They established
him at first in lodgings, where he was boarded with many others,
having heard somewhat of his early youth.  But when Madame Heine, at
the end of twelve months, perceived that he was punctual at the
bank, and that his allowances, which, though moderate in England,
were handsome in Munich, carried him on without debt, she opened her
motherly arms and suggested to his mother and to himself, that he
should live with them.  In this way he also was domiciled up two
pairs of stairs in the palatial residence in the Ludwigs Strasse.

***************************************************************************