Document Name: /part2/suspicious-document02157.txt
Atom_Type: paragraph
Cluster_Method: combine_confidences
Plagiarized Atoms Count: 55/55
Non-Plagiarized Atoms Count: 0/55

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NON-PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is an atom: 
ï»¿TOM SAWYER, DETECTIVE

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER I.  AN INVITATION FOR TOM AND HUCK

This is an atom: 
[Footnote: Strange as the incidents of this story are, they are not
inventions, but facts--even to the public confession of the accused.  I
take them from an old-time Swedish criminal trial, change the actors, and
transfer the scenes to America.  I have added some details, but only a
couple of them are important ones. -- M. T.]

This is an atom: 
WELL, it was the next spring after me and Tom Sawyer set our old nigger
Jim free, the time he was chained up for a runaway slave down there on
Tom's uncle Silas's farm in Arkansaw.  The frost was working out of the
ground, and out of the air, too, and it was getting closer and closer
onto barefoot time every day; and next it would be marble time, and next
mumbletypeg, and next tops and hoops, and next kites, and then right away
it would be summer and going in a-swimming. It just makes a boy homesick
to look ahead like that and see how far off summer is. Yes, and it sets
him to sighing and saddening around, and there's something the matter
with him, he don't know what. But anyway, he gets out by himself and
mopes and thinks; and mostly he hunts for a lonesome place high up on the
hill in the edge of the woods, and sets there and looks away off on the
big Mississippi down there a-reaching miles and miles around the points
where the timber looks smoky and dim it's so far off and still, and
everything's so solemn it seems like everybody you've loved is dead and
gone, and you 'most wish you was dead and gone too, and done with it all.

This is an atom: 
Don't you know what that is? It's spring fever. That is what the name of
it is.  And when you've got it, you want--oh, you don't quite know what
it is you DO want, but it just fairly makes your heart ache, you want it
so! It seems to you that mainly what you want is to get away; get away
from the same old tedious things you're so used to seeing and so tired
of, and set something new. That is the idea; you want to go and be a
wanderer; you want to go wandering far away to strange countries where
everything is mysterious and wonderful and romantic. And if you can't do
that, you'll put up with considerable less; you'll go anywhere you CAN
go, just so as to get away, and be thankful of the chance, too.

This is an atom: 
Well, me and Tom Sawyer had the spring fever, and had it bad, too; but it
warn't any use to think about Tom trying to get away, because, as he
said, his Aunt Polly wouldn't let him quit school and go traipsing off
somers wasting time; so we was pretty blue.  We was setting on the front
steps one day about sundown talking this way, when out comes his aunt
Polly with a letter in her hand and says:

This is an atom: 
"Tom, I reckon you've got to pack up and go down to Arkansaw--your aunt
Sally wants you."

This is an atom: 
I 'most jumped out of my skin for joy.  I reckoned Tom would fly at his
aunt and hug her head off; but if you believe me he set there like a
rock, and never said a word. It made me fit to cry to see him act so
foolish, with such a noble chance as this opening up.  Why, we might lose
it if he didn't speak up and show he was thankful and grateful. But he
set there and studied and studied till I was that distressed I didn't
know what to do; then he says, very ca'm, and I could a shot him for it:

This is an atom: 
"Well," he says, "I'm right down sorry, Aunt Polly, but I reckon I got to
be excused--for the present."

This is an atom: 
His aunt Polly was knocked so stupid and so mad at the cold impudence of
it that she couldn't say a word for as much as a half a minute, and this
gave me a chance to nudge Tom and whisper:

This is an atom: 
"Ain't you got any sense? Sp'iling such a noble chance as this and
throwing it away?"

This is an atom: 
But he warn't disturbed.  He mumbled back:

This is an atom: 
"Huck Finn, do you want me to let her SEE how bad I want to go? Why,
she'd begin to doubt, right away, and imagine a lot of sicknesses and
dangers and objections, and first you know she'd take it all back.  You
lemme alone; I reckon I know how to work her."

This is an atom: 
Now I never would 'a' thought of that.  But he was right. Tom Sawyer was
always right--the levelest head I ever see, and always AT himself and
ready for anything you might spring on him.  By this time his aunt Polly
was all straight again, and she let fly.  She says:

This is an atom: 
"You'll be excused! YOU will! Well, I never heard the like of it in all
my days! The idea of you talking like that to ME! Now take yourself off
and pack your traps; and if I hear another word out of you about what
you'll be excused from and what you won't, I lay I'LL excuse you--with a
hickory!"

This is an atom: 
She hit his head a thump with her thimble as we dodged by, and he let on
to be whimpering as we struck for the stairs. Up in his room he hugged
me, he was so out of his head for gladness because he was going
traveling.  And he says:

This is an atom: 
"Before we get away she'll wish she hadn't let me go, but she won't know
any way to get around it now. After what she's said, her pride won't let
her take it back."

This is an atom: 
Tom was packed in ten minutes, all except what his aunt and Mary would
finish up for him; then we waited ten more for her to get cooled down and
sweet and gentle again; for Tom said it took her ten minutes to unruffle
in times when half of her feathers was up, but twenty when they was all
up, and this was one of the times when they was all up.  Then we went
down, being in a sweat to know what the letter said.

This is an atom: 
She was setting there in a brown study, with it laying in her lap.  We
set down, and she says:

This is an atom: 
"They're in considerable trouble down there, and they think you and
Huck'll be a kind of diversion for them--'comfort,' they say.  Much of
that they'll get out of you and Huck Finn, I reckon.  There's a neighbor
named Brace Dunlap that's been wanting to marry their Benny for three
months, and at last they told him point blank and once for all, he
COULDN'T; so he has soured on them, and they're worried about it. I
reckon he's somebody they think they better be on the good side of, for
they've tried to please him by hiring his no-account brother to help on
the farm when they can't hardly afford it, and don't want him around
anyhow. Who are the Dunlaps?"

This is an atom: 
"They live about a mile from Uncle Silas's place, Aunt Polly--all the
farmers live about a mile apart down there--and Brace Dunlap is a long
sight richer than any of the others, and owns a whole grist of niggers.
He's a widower, thirty-six years old, without any children, and is proud
of his money and overbearing, and everybody is a little afraid of him.  I
judge he thought he could have any girl he wanted, just for the asking,
and it must have set him back a good deal when he found he couldn't get
Benny.  Why, Benny's only half as old as he is, and just as sweet and
lovely as--well, you've seen her. Poor old Uncle Silas--why, it's
pitiful, him trying to curry favor that way--so hard pushed and poor, and
yet hiring that useless Jubiter Dunlap to please his ornery brother."

This is an atom: 
"What a name--Jubiter! Where'd he get it?"

This is an atom: 
"It's only just a nickname.  I reckon they've forgot his real name long
before this.  He's twenty-seven, now, and has had it ever since the first
time he ever went in swimming.  The school teacher seen a round brown
mole the size of a dime on his left leg above his knee, and four little
bits of moles around it, when he was naked, and he said it minded him of
Jubiter and his moons; and the children thought it was funny, and so they
got to calling him Jubiter, and he's Jubiter yet.  He's tall, and lazy,
and sly, and sneaky, and ruther cowardly, too, but kind of good-natured,
and wears long brown hair and no beard, and hasn't got a cent, and Brace
boards him for nothing, and gives him his old clothes to wear, and
despises him. Jubiter is a twin."

This is an atom: 
"What's t'other twin like?"

This is an atom: 
"Just exactly like Jubiter--so they say; used to was, anyway, but he
hain't been seen for seven years. He got to robbing when he was nineteen
or twenty, and they jailed him; but he broke jail and got away--up North
here, somers.  They used to hear about him robbing and burglaring now and
then, but that was years ago. He's dead, now.  At least that's what they
say. They don't hear about him any more."

This is an atom: 
"What was his name?"

This is an atom: 
"Jake."

This is an atom: 
There wasn't anything more said for a considerable while; the old lady
was thinking.  At last she says:

This is an atom: 
"The thing that is mostly worrying your aunt Sally is the tempers that
that man Jubiter gets your uncle into."

This is an atom: 
Tom was astonished, and so was I. Tom says:

This is an atom: 
"Tempers? Uncle Silas? Land, you must be joking! I didn't know he HAD any
temper."

This is an atom: 
"Works him up into perfect rages, your aunt Sally says; says he acts as
if he would really hit the man, sometimes."

This is an atom: 
"Aunt Polly, it beats anything I ever heard of. Why, he's just as gentle
as mush."

This is an atom: 
"Well, she's worried, anyway.  Says your uncle Silas is like a changed
man, on account of all this quarreling. And the neighbors talk about it,
and lay all the blame on your uncle, of course, because he's a preacher
and hain't got any business to quarrel.  Your aunt Sally says he hates to
go into the pulpit he's so ashamed; and the people have begun to cool
toward him, and he ain't as popular now as he used to was."

This is an atom: 
"Well, ain't it strange? Why, Aunt Polly, he was always so good and kind
and moony and absent-minded and chuckle-headed and lovable--why, he was
just an angel! What CAN be the matter of him, do you reckon?"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER II.  JAKE DUNLAP

This is an atom: 
WE had powerful good luck; because we got a chance in a stern-wheeler
from away North which was bound for one of them bayous or one-horse
rivers away down Louisiana way, and so we could go all the way down the
Upper Mississippi and all the way down the Lower Mississippi to that farm
in Arkansaw without having to change steamboats at St. Louis; not so very
much short of a thousand miles at one pull.

This is an atom: 
A pretty lonesome boat; there warn't but few passengers, and all old
folks, that set around, wide apart, dozing, and was very quiet.  We was
four days getting out of the "upper river," because we got aground so
much. But it warn't dull--couldn't be for boys that was traveling, of
course.

This is an atom: 
From the very start me and Tom allowed that there was somebody sick in
the stateroom next to ourn, because the meals was always toted in there
by the waiters. By and by we asked about it--Tom did and the waiter said
it was a man, but he didn't look sick.

This is an atom: 
"Well, but AIN'T he sick?"

This is an atom: 
"I don't know; maybe he is, but 'pears to me he's just letting on."

This is an atom: 
"What makes you think that?"

This is an atom: 
"Because if he was sick he would pull his clothes off SOME time or
other--don't you reckon he would? Well, this one don't. At least he don't
ever pull off his boots, anyway."

This is an atom: 
"The mischief he don't! Not even when he goes to bed?"

This is an atom: 
"No."

This is an atom: 
It was always nuts for Tom Sawyer--a mystery was.  If you'd lay out a
mystery and a pie before me and him, you wouldn't have to say take your
choice; it was a thing that would regulate itself.  Because in my nature
I have always run to pie, whilst in his nature he has always run to
mystery. People are made different.  And it is the best way. Tom says to
the waiter:

This is an atom: 
"What's the man's name?"

This is an atom: 
"Phillips."

This is an atom: 
"Where'd he come aboard?"

This is an atom: 
"I think he got aboard at Elexandria, up on the Iowa line."

This is an atom: 
"What do you reckon he's a-playing?"

This is an atom: 
"I hain't any notion--I never thought of it."

This is an atom: 
I says to myself, here's another one that runs to pie.

This is an atom: 
"Anything peculiar about him?--the way he acts or talks?"

This is an atom: 
"No--nothing, except he seems so scary, and keeps his doors locked night
and day both, and when you knock he won't let you in till he opens the
door a crack and sees who it is."

***************************************************************************