Document Name: /part1/suspicious-document00932.txt
Atom_Type: paragraph
Cluster_Method: combine_confidences
Plagiarized Atoms Count: 2527/2527
Non-Plagiarized Atoms Count: 0/2527

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NON-PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is an atom: 
ï»¿Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

This is an atom: 
Clare Avery, by Emily Sarah Holt.
________________________________________________________________________
This book, one of Emily Holt's many historical novels, is set in the
reign of Elizabeth, around the time of the Armada, which has a chapter
to itself.  The story revolves round a moderately well-off family, who
really did exist, many details of the family being given in the last
chapter, or Appendix.  In order to make the story realistic there are a
number of fictitious persons, but there is always a note to that effect
when the person first appears.  In general these fictitious persons are
no more than minor characters.

This is an atom: 
There is an interesting passage in which Jack, one of the youths of the
family, obtains a place at Court, but finds he needs to spend enormous
amounts on apparel to keep up with the other young men he meets.  By no
means does the family have the resources to pay his trade-debts, and it
turns out that his gambling debts, known as "debts of honour" are even
greater.  They had to tell him to go away and sort it out for himself.

This is an atom: 
But it must be said that a great deal of the book is taken up with
religious discussions, mostly centring on the perceived imperfections
of the Papist religion, as opposed to the Protestant.  If you are not
interested in this it does tend to make the going a bit heavy at times.
But if you are interested, well then, it makes good reading.

This is an atom: 
As ever with this author there are many words and phrases used which
are now outdated.  When they first appear a note of the current meaning
is given, for instance "popinjay [parrot]".  On the whole this is not
confusing except where a word has changed or even reversed its meaning.
We do not recommend learning by heart from a sort of vocab list, the
words in use in Elizabethan times, unless you are studying that
period in depth.
________________________________________________________________________
CLARE AVERY, BY EMILY SARAH HOLT.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER ONE.

This is an atom: 
LITTLE CLARE'S FIRST HOME.

This is an atom: 
"The mossy marbles rest
  On the lips he hath pressed
  In their bloom,
  And the names he loved to hear
  Have been carved for many a year
  On the tomb."

This is an atom: 
_Oliver Wendell Holmes_.

This is an atom: 
"Cold!" said the carrier, blowing on his fingers to keep them warm.

This is an atom: 
"Cold, bully Penmore!" ejaculated Hal Dockett,--farrier, horse-leech,
and cow-doctor in ordinary to the town of Bodmin and its
neighbourhood...  "Lack-a-daisy! thou that hast been carrier these
thirty years, and thy father afore thee, and his father afore him, ever
sith `old Dick Boar' days, shouldst be as hard as a milestone by this
time.  'Tis the end of March, fellow!"

This is an atom: 
Be it known that "old Dick Boar" was Mr Dockett's extremely irreverent
style of allusion to His Majesty King Richard the Third.

This is an atom: 
"'Tis the end of as bitter a March as hath been in Cornwall these
hundred years," said the carrier.  "Whither away now, lad?"

This is an atom: 
"Truly, unto Bradmond, whither I am bidden to see unto the black cow."

This is an atom: 
"Is it sooth, lad, that the master is failing yonder?"

This is an atom: 
"Folk saith so," replied Hal, his jocund face clouding over.  "It shall
be an evil day for Bodmin, _that_!"

This is an atom: 
"Ay so!" echoed the carrier.  "Well! we must all be laid in earth one
day.  God be wi' thee, lad!"

This is an atom: 
And with a crack of his whip, the waggon lumbered slowly forward upon
the Truro road, while Dockett went on his way towards a house standing a
little distance on the left, in a few acres of garden, with a paddock
behind.

This is an atom: 
About the cold there was no question.  The ground, which had been white
with snow for many days, was now a mixture of black and white, under the
influence of a thaw; while a bitterly cold wind, which made everybody
shiver, rose now and then to a wild whirl, slammed the doors, and
groaned through the wood-work.  A fragment of cloud, rather less dim and
gloomy than the rest of the heavy grey sky, was as much as could be seen
of the sun.

This is an atom: 
Nor was the political atmosphere much more cheerful than the physical.
All over England,--and it might be said, all over Europe,--men's hearts
were failing them for fear,--by no means for the first time in that
century.  In Holland the Spaniards, vanquished not by men, but by winds
and waves from God, had abandoned the siege of Leyden; and the
sovereignty of the Netherlands had been offered to Elizabeth of England,
but after some consideration was refused.  In France, the Massacre of
Saint Bartholomew, nearly three years before, had been followed by the
siege of La Rochelle, the death of the miserable Charles the Ninth, and
the alliance in favour of Popery, which styled itself the Holy League.
At home, gardeners were busy introducing the wallflower, the hollyhock,
basil, and sweet marjoram; the first licence for public plays was
granted to Burbage and his company, among whom was a young man from
Warwickshire, a butcher's son, with a turn for making verses, whose name
was William Shakspere; the Queen had issued a decree forbidding costly
apparel (not including her own); and the last trace of feudal serfdom
had just disappeared, by the abolition of "villenage" upon the Crown
manors.  As concerned other countries, except when active hostilities
were going on, Englishmen were not generally much interested, unless it
were in that far-off New World which Columbus had discovered not a
hundred years before,--or in that unknown land, far away also, beyond
the white North Cape, whither adventurers every now and then set out
with the hope of discovering a north-west passage to China,--the
north-west passage which, though sought now with a different object, no
one has discovered yet.

This is an atom: 
It may be as well to recall the state of knowledge in English society at
this period.  The time had gone by when the burning of coal was
prohibited, as prejudicial to health; but the limits of London, beyond
which building might not extend, were soon after this fixed at three
miles from the city gates; the introduction of private carriages was
long opposed, lest it should lead to luxury; [Note 1] and sumptuary
laws, regulating, according to rank, the materials for dress and the
details of trimmings, were issued every few years.  Needles were
treasures beyond reach of the poor; yeast, starch, glass bottles, woven
stockings, fans, muffs, tulips, marigolds,--had all been invented or
introduced within thirty years: the peach and the potato were alike
luxuries known to few: forks, sedan or Bath chairs, coffee, tea, gas,
telescopes, newspapers, shawls, muslin,--not to include railways and
telegraphs,--were ideas that had not yet occurred to any one.  Nobody
had ever heard of the circulation of the blood.  A doctor was a _rara
avis_: medical advice was mainly given in the towns by apothecaries, and
in the country by herbalists and "wise women."  There were no
Dissenters--except the few who remained Romanists; and perhaps there
were not likely to be many, when the fine for non-attendance at the
parish church was twenty pounds per month.  Parochial relief was
unknown, and any old woman obnoxious to her neighbours was likely to be
drowned as a witch.  Lastly, by the Bull of excommunication of Pope Pius
the Fifth, issued in April, 1569, Queen Elizabeth had been solemnly "cut
off from the unity of Christ's Body," and "deprived of her pretended
right to the Crown of England," while all who obeyed or upheld her were
placed under a terrible curse.  [Note 2.]

This is an atom: 
Nineteen years had passed since that triumphant 17th of November which
had seen all England in a frenzy of joy on the accession of Elizabeth
Tudor.  They were at most very young men and women who could not
remember the terrible days of Mary, and the glad welcome given to her
sister.  Still warm at the heart of England lay the memory of the Marian
martyrs; still deep and strong in her was hatred of every shadow of
Popery.  The petition had not yet been erased from the Litany--why
should it ever have been?--"From the Bishop of Rome and all his
enormities, good Lord, deliver us!"

This is an atom: 
On the particular afternoon whereon the story opens, one of the
dreariest points of the landscape was the house towards which Hal
Dockett's steps were bent.  It was of moderate size, and might have been
very comfortable if somebody had taken pains to make it so.  But it
looked as if the pains had not been taken.  Half the windows were
covered by shutters; the wainscot was sadly in want of a fresh coat of
paint; the woodbine, which should have been trained up beside the porch,
hung wearily down, as if it were tired of trying to climb when nobody
helped it; the very ivy was ragged and dusty.  The doors shut with that
hollow sound peculiar to empty uncurtained rooms, and groaned, as they
opened, over the scarcity of oil.  And if the spectator had passed
inside, he would have seen that out of the whole house, only four rooms
were inhabited beside the kitchen and its dependencies.  In all the
rest, the dusty furniture was falling to pieces from long neglect, and
the spiders carried on their factories at their own pleasure.

This is an atom: 
One of these four rooms, a long, narrow chamber, on the upper floor,
gave signs of having been inhabited very recently.  On the square table
lay a quantity of coarse needlework, which somebody seemed to have
bundled together and left hastily; and on one of the hard,
straight-backed chairs was a sorely-disabled wooden doll, of the
earliest Dutch order, with mere rudiments, of arms and legs, and
deprived by accidents of a great portion of these.  The needlework said
plainly that there must be a woman in the dreary house, and the doll,
staring at the ceiling with black expressionless eyes, spoke as
distinctly for the existence of a child.

This is an atom: 
Suddenly the door of this room opened with a plaintive creak, and a
little woman, on the elderly side of middle life, put in her head.

This is an atom: 
A bright, energetic, active little woman she seemed,--not the sort of
person who might be expected to put up meekly with dim windows and dusty
floors.

This is an atom: 
"Marry La'kin!"  [a corruption of "Mary, little Lady!"] she said aloud.
"Of a truth, what a charge be these childre!"

This is an atom: 
The cause of this remark was hardly apparent, since no child was to be
seen; but the little woman came further into the room, her gestures soon
showing that she was looking for a child who ought to have been visible.

This is an atom: 
"Well!  I've searched every chamber in this house save the Master's
closet.  Where can yon little popinjay [parrot] have hid her?  Marry
La'kin!"

This is an atom: 
This expletive was certainly not appreciated by her who used it.
Nothing could much more have astonished or shocked Barbara Polwhele [a
fictitious person]--than whom no more uncompromising Protestant breathed
between John o' Groat's and the Land's End--than to discover that since
she came into the room, she had twice invoked the assistance of Saint
Mary the Virgin.

This is an atom: 
Barbara's search soon brought her to the conclusion that the child she
sought was not in that quarter.  She shut the door, and came out into a
narrow gallery, from one side of which a wooden staircase ran down into
the hall.  It was a wide hall of vaulted stone, hung with faded
tapestry, old and wanting repair, like everything else in its vicinity.
Across the hall Barbara trotted with short, quick steps, and opening a
door at the further end, went into the one pleasant room in all the
house.  This was a very small turret-chamber, hexagonal in shape, three
of its six sides being filled with a large bay-window, in the middle
compartment of which were several coats of arms in stained glass.  A
table, which groaned under a mass of books and papers, nearly filled the
room; and writing at it sat a venerable-looking, white-haired man, who,
seeing Barbara, laid down his pen, wiped his spectacles, and placidly
inquired what she wanted.  He will be an old friend to some readers: for
he was John Avery of Bradmond.

This is an atom: 
"Master, an't like you, have you seen Mrs Clare of late?"

This is an atom: 
"How late, Barbara?"

This is an atom: 
"Marry, not the fourth part of an hour gone, I left the child in the
nursery a-playing with her puppet, when I went down to let in Hal
Dockett, and carry him to see what ailed the black cow; and now I be
back, no sign of the child is any whither.  I have been in every
chamber, and looked in the nursery thrice."

This is an atom: 
"Where should she be?" quietly demanded Mr Avery.

This is an atom: 
"Marry, where but in the nursery, without you had fetched her away."

This is an atom: 
"And where should she not be?"

This is an atom: 
"Why, any other whither but here and there,--more specially in the
garden."

This is an atom: 
"Nay, then, reach me my staff, Barbara, and we will go look in the
garden.  If that be whither our little maid should specially not be,
'tis there we be bound to find her."

This is an atom: 
"Marry, but that is sooth!" said Barbara heartily, bringing the
walking-stick.  "Never in all my life saw I child that gat into more
mischievousness, nor gave more trouble to them that had her in charge."

This is an atom: 
"Thy memory is something short, Barbara," returned her master with a dry
smile, "'Tis but little over a score of years sithence thou wert used to
say the very same of her father."

This is an atom: 
"Eh, Master!--nay, not Master Walter!" said Barbara, deprecatingly.

This is an atom: 
"Well, trouble and sorrow be ever biggest in the present tense,"
answered he.  "And I wot well thou hast a great charge on thine hands."

This is an atom: 
"I reckon you should think so, an' you had the doing of it," said
Barbara complacently.  "Up ere the lark, and abed after the nightingale!
What with scouring, and washing, and dressing meat, and making the
beds, and baking, and brewing, and sewing, and mending, and Mrs Clare
and you atop of it all--"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, prithee, let me drop off the top, so thou lame me not, for the
rest is enough for one woman's shoulders."

This is an atom: 
"In good sooth, Master, but you lack as much looking after, in your way,
as Mrs Clare doth; for verily your head is so lapped in your books and
your learning, that I do think, an' I tended you not, you should break
your fast toward eventide, and bethink you but to-morrow at noon that
you had not supped overnight."

This is an atom: 
"Very like, Barbara,--very like!" answered the old man with a meek
smile.  "Thou hast been a right true maid unto me and mine,--as saith
Solomon of the wise woman, thou hast done us good and not evil, all the
days of thy life.  The Lord apay thee for it!--Now go thou forward, and
search for our little maid, and I will abide hither until thou bring
her.  If I mistake not much, thou shalt find her within a stone's throw
of the fishpond."

This is an atom: 
"The fishpond?--eh, Master!"

This is an atom: 
And Barbara quickened her steps to a run, while John Avery sat down
slowly upon a stone seat on the terrace, leaning both hands on his
staff, as if he could go no farther.  Was he very tired?  No.  He was
only very, very near Home.

This is an atom: 
Close to the fishpond, peering intently into it between the gaps of the
stone balustrade, Barbara at length found what she sought, in the shape
of a little girl of six years old.  The child was spoiling her frock to
the best of her ability, by lying on the snow-sprinkled grass; but she
was so intent upon something which she saw, or wanted to see, that her
captor's approach was unheard, and Barbara pounced on her in triumph
without any attempt at flight.

This is an atom: 
"Now, Mrs Clare, [a fictitious character] come you hither with me!"
said Barbara, seizing the culprit.  "Is this to be a good child, think
you, when you were bidden abide in the nursery?"

This is an atom: 
"O Bab!" said the child, half sobbingly.  "I wanted to see the fishes."

This is an atom: 
"You have seen enough of the fishes for one morrow," returned Barbara
relentlessly; "and if the fishes could see you, they should cry shame
upon you for ruinating of your raiment by the damp grass."

This is an atom: 
"But the fishes be damp, Bab!" remonstrated Clare.  Barbara professed
not to hear the last remark, and lifting the small student of natural
history, bore her, pouting and reluctant, to her grandfather on the
terrace.

This is an atom: 
"So here comes my little maid," said he, pleasantly.  "Why didst not
abide in the nursery, as thou wert bid, little Clare?"

This is an atom: 
"I wanted to see the fishes," returned Clare, still pouting.

This is an atom: 
"We cannot alway have what we want," answered he.

This is an atom: 
"You can!" objected Clare.

This is an atom: 
"Nay, my child, I cannot," gravely replied her grandfather.  "An' I
could, I would have alway a good, obedient little grand-daughter."

This is an atom: 
Clare played with Mr Avery's stick, and was silent.

This is an atom: 
"Leave her with me, good Barbara, and go look after thy mighty charges,"
said her master, smiling.  "I will bring her within ere long."

This is an atom: 
Barbara trotted off, and Clare, relieved from the fear of her duenna,
went back to her previous subject.

This is an atom: 
"Gaffer, what do the fishes?"

This is an atom: 
"What do they?  Why, swim about in the water, and shake their tails, and
catch flies for their dinner."

This is an atom: 
"What think they on, Gaffer?"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, thou art beyond me there.  I never was a fish.  How can I tell
thee?"

This is an atom: 
"Would they bite me?" demanded Clare solemnly.

This is an atom: 
"Nay, I reckon not."

This is an atom: 
"What, not a wild fish?" said Clare, opening her dark blue eyes.

This is an atom: 
Mr Avery laughed, and shook his head.

This is an atom: 
"But I would fain know--And, O Gaffer!" exclaimed the child, suddenly
interrupting herself, "do tell me, why did Tom kill the pig?"

This is an atom: 
"Kill the pig?  Why, for that my Clare should have somewhat to eat at
her dinner and her supper."

This is an atom: 
"Killed him to eat him?" wonderingly asked Clare, who had never
associated live pigs with roast pork.

This is an atom: 
"For sure," replied her grandfather.

This is an atom: 
"Then he had not done somewhat naughty?"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, not he."

This is an atom: 
"I would, Gaffer," said Clare, very gravely, "that Tom had not smothered
the pig ere he began to lay eggs.  [The genuine speech of a child of
Clare's age.] I would so have liked a _little_ pig!"

This is an atom: 
The suggestion of pig's eggs was too much for Mr Avery's gravity.  "And
what hadst done with a little pig, my maid."

This is an atom: 
"I would have washed it, and donned it, and put it abed," said Clare.

This is an atom: 
"Methinks he should soon have marred his raiment.  And maybe he should
have loved cold water not more dearly than a certain little maid that I
could put a name to."

This is an atom: 
Clare adroitly turned from this perilous topic, with an unreasoning
dread of being washed there and then; though in truth it was not
cleanliness to which she objected, but wet chills and rough friction.

This is an atom: 
"Gaffer, may I go with Bab to four-hours unto Mistress Pendexter?"

This is an atom: 
"An' thou wilt, my little floweret."

This is an atom: 
Mr Avery rose slowly, and taking Clare by the hand, went back to the
house.  He returned to his turret-study, but Clare scampered upstairs,
possessed herself of her doll, and ran in and out of the inhabited rooms
until she discovered Barbara in the kitchen, beating up eggs for a
pudding.

This is an atom: 
"Bab, I may go with thee!"

This is an atom: 
"Go with me?" repeated Barbara, looking up with some surprise.  "Marry,
Mrs Clare, I hope you may."

This is an atom: 
"To Mistress Pendexter!" shouted Clare ecstatically.

This is an atom: 
"Oh ay!" assented Barbara.  "Saith the master so?"

This is an atom: 
Clare nodded.  "And, Bab, shall I take Doll?"

This is an atom: 
This contraction for Dorothy must have been the favourite name with the
little ladies of the time for the plaything on which it is now
inalienably fixed.

This is an atom: 
"I will sew up yon hole in her gown, then, first," said Barbara, taking
the doll by its head in what Clare thought a very disrespectful manner.
"Mrs Clare, this little gown is cruel ragged; if I could but see time,
I had need make you another."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, do, Bab!" cried Clare in high delight.

This is an atom: 
"Well, some day," replied Barbara discreetly.

This is an atom: 
A few hours later, Barbara and Clare were standing at the door of a
small, neat cottage in a country lane, where dwelt Barbara's sister,
Marian Pendexter, [a fictitious person] widow of the village
schoolmaster.  The door was opened by Marian herself, a woman some five
years the senior of her sister, to whom she bore a good deal of
likeness, but Marian was the quieter mannered and the more silent of the
two.

This is an atom: 
"Marry, little Mistress Clare!" was her smiling welcome.  "Come in,
prithee, little Mistress, and thou shalt have a buttered cake to thy
four-hours.  Give thee good even, Bab."

This is an atom: 
A snowy white cloth covered the little round table in the cottage, and
on it were laid a loaf of bread a piece of butter, and a jug of milk.
In honour of her guests, Marian went to her cupboard, and brought out a
mould of damson cheese, a bowl of syllabub, and a round tea-cake, which
she set before the fire to toast.

This is an atom: 
"And how fareth good Master Avery?" asked Marian, as she closed the
cupboard door, and came back.

This is an atom: 
Barbara shook her head ominously.

This is an atom: 
"But ill, forsooth?" pursued her sister.

This is an atom: 
"Marry, an' you ask at him, he is alway well; but--I carry mine eyes,
Marian."

This is an atom: 
Barbara's theory of educating children was to keep them entirely
ignorant of the affairs of their elders.  To secure this end, she
adopted a vague, misty style of language, of which she fondly imagined
that Clare did not understand a word.  The result was unfortunate, as it
usually is.  Clare understood detached bits of her nurse's conversation,
over which she brooded silently in her own little mind, until she
evolved a whole story--a long way off the truth.  It would have done
much less harm to tell her the whole truth at once; for the fact of a
mystery being made provoked her curiosity, and her imaginations were far
more extreme than the facts.

This is an atom: 
"Ah, he feeleth the lack of my mistress his wife, I reckon," said Marian
pityingly.  "She must be soothly a sad miss every whither."

This is an atom: 
"Thou mayest well say so," assented Barbara.  "Dear heart! 'tis nigh
upon five good years now, and I have not grown used to the lack of her
even yet.  Thou seest, moreover, he hath had sorrow upon sorrow.  'Twas
but the year afore that Master Walter [a fictitious person] and Mistress
Frances did depart [die]; and then, two years gone, Mistress Kate, [a
fictitious person].  Ah, well-a-day! we be all mortal."

This is an atom: 
"Thank we God therefore, good Bab," said Marian quietly.  "For we shall
see them again the sooner.  But if so be, Bab, that aught befel the
Master, what should come of yonder rosebud?"

This is an atom: 
And Marian cast a significant look at Clare, who sat apparently
engrossed with a mug full of syllabub.

This is an atom: 
"Humph! an' I had the reins, I had driven my nag down another road,"
returned Barbara.  "Who but Master Robin [a fictitious person] and
Mistress Thekla [a fictitious person] were meetest, trow?  But lo! you!
what doth Mistress Walter but indite a letter unto the Master, to note
that whereas she hath never set eyes on the jewel--and whose fault was
that, prithee?--so, an' it liked Him above to do the thing thou wottest,
she must needs have the floweret sent thither.  And a cruel deal of fair
words, how she loved and pined to see her, and more foolery belike.
Marry La'kin! ere I had given her her will, I had seen her alongside of
King Pharaoh at bottom o' the Red Sea.  But the Master, what did he, but
write back and say that it should be even as she would.  Happy woman be
her dole, say I!"

This is an atom: 
And Barbara set down the milk-jug with a rough determinate air that must
have hurt its feelings, had it possessed any.

This is an atom: 
"Mistress Walter! that is, the Lady--" [Note 3.]

This is an atom: 
"Ay--she," said Barbara hastily, before the name could follow.

This is an atom: 
"Well, Bab, after all, methinks 'tis but like she should ask it.  And if
Master Robin be parson of that very same parish wherein she dwelleth, of
a surety ye could never send the little one to him, away from her own
mother?"

This is an atom: 
"Poor little soul! she is well mothered!" said Barbara ironically.
"Never to set eyes on the child for six long years; and then, when
Mistress Avery, dear heart! writ unto her how sweet and _debonnaire_
[pretty, pleasing] the lily-bud grew, to mewl forth that it was so great
a way, and her health so pitiful, that she must needs endure to bereave
her of the happiness to come and see the same.  Marry La'kin! call yon a
mother!"

This is an atom: 
"But it is a great way, Bab."

This is an atom: 
"Wherefore went she so far off, then?" returned Barbara quickly enough.
"And lo! you! she can journey thence all the way to York or Chester when
she would get her the new fashions,--over land, too!--yet cannot she
take boat to Bideford, which were less travail by half.  An' yonder
jewel had been mine, Marian, I would not have left it lie in the case
for six years, trow!"

This is an atom: 
"Maybe not, Bab," answered Marian in her quiet way.  "Yet 'tis ill
judging of our neighbour.  And if the lady's health be in very deed so
pitiful--"

This is an atom: 
"Neighbour! she is no neighbour of mine, dwelling up by Marton Moss!"
interrupted Barbara, as satirically as before.  "And in regard to her
pitiful health--why, Marian, I have dwelt in the same house with her for
a year and a half, and I never knew yet her evil health let [hinder] her
from a junketing.  Good lack! it stood alway in the road when somewhat
was in hand the which misliked her.  Go to church in the rain,--nay, by
'r Lady!--and 'twas too cold in the winter to help string the apples,
and too hot in the summer to help conserve the fruits: to be sure!  But
let there be an even's revelling at Sir Christopher Marres his house,
and she bidden,--why, it might rain enough to drench you, but her cloak
was thick then, and her boots were strong enough, and her cough was not
to any hurt--bless her!"

This is an atom: 
The tone of Barbara's exclamation somewhat belied the words.

This is an atom: 
"Have a care, Bab, lest--" and Marian's glance at Clare explained her
meaning.

This is an atom: 
"Not she!" returned Barbara, looking in her turn at the child, whose
attention was apparently concentrated on one of Marian's kittens, which
she was stroking on her lap, while the mother cat walked uneasily round
and round her chair.  "I have alway a care to speak above yon head."

This is an atom: 
"Is there not a little sister?" asked Marian in a low tone.

This is an atom: 
"Ay," said Barbara, dropping her voice.  "Blanche, the babe's name is [a
fictitious character.] Like Mrs Walter--never content with plain Nell
and Nan.  Her childre must have names like so many queens.  And I dare
say the maid shall be bred up like one."

This is an atom: 
The conversation gradually passed to other topics, and the subject was
not again touched upon by either sister.

This is an atom: 
How much of it had Clare heard, and how much of that did she understand?

This is an atom: 
A good deal more of either than Barbara imagined.  She knew that Walter
had been her father's name, and she was well aware that "Mistress
Walter" from Barbara's lips, indicated her mother.  She knew that her
mother had married again, and that she lived a long way off.  She knew
also that this mother of hers was no favourite with Barbara.  And from
this conversation she gathered, that in the event of something
happening--but what that was she did not realise--she was to go and live
with her mother.  Clare was an imaginative child, and the topic of all
her dreams was this mysterious mother whom she had never seen.  Many a
time, when Barbara only saw that she was quietly dressing or hushing her
doll, Clare's mind was at work, puzzling over the incomprehensible
reason of Barbara's evident dislike to her absent mother.  What shocking
thing could she have done, thought Clare, to make Bab angry with her?
Had she poisoned her sister, or drowned the cat, or stolen the big crown
off the Queen's head?  For the romance of a little child is always
incongruous and sensational.

This is an atom: 
In truth, there was nothing sensational, and little that was not
commonplace, about the character and history of little Clare's mother,
whose maiden name was Orige Williams.  She had been the spoilt child of
a wealthy old Cornish gentleman,--the pretty pet on whom he lavished all
his love and bounty, never crossing her will from the cradle.  And she
repaid him, as children thus trained often do, by crossing his will in
the only matter concerning which he much cared.  He had set his heart on
her marrying a rich knight whose estate lay contiguous to his own: while
she, entirely self-centred, chose to make a runaway match with young
Lieutenant Avery, whose whole year's income was about equal to one week
of her father's rent-roll.  Bitterly disappointed, Mr Williams declared
that "As she had made her bed, so she should lie on it;" for not one
penny would he ever bestow on her while he lived, and he would bequeath
the bulk of his property to his nephew.  In consequence of this threat,
which reached, her ears, Orige, romantic and high-flown, fancied herself
at once a heroine and a martyr, when there was not in her the capacity
for either.  In the sort of language in which she delighted, she spoke
of herself as a friendless orphan, a sacrifice to love, truth, and
honour.  It never seemed to occur to her that in deceiving her father--
for she had led him to believe until the last moment that she intended
to conform to his wishes--she had acted both untruthfully and
dishonourably; while as to love, she was callous to every shape of it
except love of self.

This is an atom: 
For about eighteen months Walter and Orige Avery lived at Bradmond,
during which time Clare was born.  She was only a few weeks old when the
summons came for her father to rejoin his ship.  He had been gone two
months, when news reached Bradmond of a naval skirmish with the
Spaniards off the Scilly Isles, in which great havoc had been made among
the Queen's forces, and in the list of the dead was Lieutenant Walter
Avery.

This is an atom: 
Now Orige's romance took a new turn.  She pictured herself as a widowed
nightingale, love-lorn and desolate, leaning her bleeding breast upon a
thorn, and moaning forth her melancholy lay.  As others have done since,
she fancied herself poetical when she was only silly.  And Barbara took
grim notice that her handkerchief was perpetually going up to tearless
eyes, and that she was not a whit less particular than usual to know
what there was for supper.

This is an atom: 
For six whole months this state of things lasted.  Orige arrayed herself
in the deepest sables; she spoke of herself as a wretched widow who
could never taste hope again; and of her baby as a poor hapless orphan,
as yet unwitting of its misery.  She declined to see any visitors, and
persisted in being miserable and disconsolate, and in taking lonely
walks to brood over her wretchedness.  And at the end of that time she
electrified her husband's family--all but one--by the announcement that
she was about to marry again.  Not for love this time, of course; no,
indeed!--but she thought it was her duty.  Sir Thomas Enville--a widower
with three children--had been very kind; and he would make such a good
father for Clare.  He had a beautiful estate in the North.  It would be
a thousand pities to let the opportunity slip.  Once for all, she
thought it her duty; and she begged that no one would worry her with
opposition, as everything was already settled.

This is an atom: 
Kate Avery, Walter's elder and only surviving sister, was exceedingly
indignant.  Her gentle, unsuspicious mother was astonished and puzzled.
But Mr Avery, after a momentary look of surprise, only smiled.

This is an atom: 
"Nay, but this passeth!"  [surpasses belief] cried Kate.

This is an atom: 
"Even as I looked for it," quietly said her father.  "I did but think it
should maybe have been somewhat later of coming."

This is an atom: 
"Her duty!" broke out indignant Kate.  "Her duty to whom?"

This is an atom: 
"To herself, I take it," said he.  "To Clare, as she counteth.  Methinks
she is one of those deceivers that do begin with deceiving of
themselves."

This is an atom: 
"To Clare!" repeated Kate.  "But, Father, she riddeth her of Clare.  The
babe is to 'bide here until such time as it may please my good Lady to
send for her."

This is an atom: 
"So much the better for Clare," quietly returned Mr Avery.

This is an atom: 
And thus it happened that Clare was six years old, and her mother was
still an utter stranger to her.

This is an atom: 
The family at Bradmond, however, were not without tidings of Lady
Enville.  It so happened that Mr Avery's adopted son, Robert Tremayne,
was Rector of the very parish in which Sir Thomas Enville lived; and a
close correspondence--for Elizabethan days--was kept up between Bradmond
and the Rectory.  In this manner they came to know, as time went on,
that Clare had a little sister, whose name was Blanche; that Lady
Enville was apparently quite happy; that Sir Thomas was very kind to
her, after his fashion, though that was not the devoted fashion of
Walter Avery.  Sir Thomas liked to adorn his pretty plaything with fine
dresses and rich jewellery; he surrounded her with every comfort; he
allowed her to go to every party within ten miles, and to spend as much
money as she pleased.  And this was precisely Orige's beau ideal of
happiness.  Her small cup seemed full--but evidently Clare was no
necessary ingredient in the compound.

This is an atom: 
If any one had taken the trouble to weigh, sort, and label the
prejudices of Barbara Polwhele, it would have been found that the
heaviest of all had for its object "Papistry,"--the second, dirt,--and
the third, "Mistress Walter."  Lieutenant Avery had been Barbara's
darling from his cradle, and she considered that his widow had outraged
his memory, by marrying again so short a time after his death.  For
this, above all her other provocations, Barbara never heartily forgave
her.  And a great struggle it was to her to keep her own feelings as
much as possible in the background, from the conscientious motive that
she ought not to instil into Clare's baby mind the faintest feeling of
aversion towards her mother.  The idea of the child being permanently
sent to Enville Court was intensely distasteful to her.  Yet wherever
Clare went, Barbara must go also.

This is an atom: 
She had promised Mrs Avery, Clare's grandmother, on her dying bed,
never to leave the child by her own free will so long as her childhood
lasted, and rather than break her word, she would have gone to Siberia--
or to Enville Court.  In Barbara's eyes, there would have been very
little choice between the two places.  Enville Court lay on the
sea-coast, and Barbara abhorred the sea, on which her only brother and
Walter Avery had died: it was in Lancashire, which she looked upon as a
den of witches, and an arid desert bare of all the comforts of life; it
was a long way from any large town, and Barbara had been used to live
within an easy walk of one; she felt, in short, as though she were being
sent into banishment.

This is an atom: 
And there was no help for it.  Within the last few weeks, a letter had
come from Lady Enville,--not very considerately worded--requesting that
if what she had heard was true, that Mr Avery's health was feeble, and
he was not likely to live long--in the event of his death, Clare should
be sent to her.

This is an atom: 
In fact, there was nowhere else to send her.  Walter's two sisters, Kate
and Frances, were both dead,--Kate unmarried, Frances van Barnevelt
leaving a daughter, but far away in Holland.  The only other person who
could reasonably have claimed the child was Mr Tremayne; and with what
show of justice could he do so, when his house lay only a stone's throw
from the park gates of Enville Court?  Fate seemed to determine that
Clare should go to her mother.  But while John Avery lived, there was to
be a respite.

This is an atom: 
It was a respite shorter than any one anticipated--except, perhaps, the
old man himself.  There came an evening three weeks after these events,
when Barbara noticed that her master, contrary to his usual custom,
instead of returning to his turret-chamber after supper, sat still by
the hall fire, shading his eyes from the lamp, and almost entirely
silent.  When Clare's bed-time came, and she lifted her little face for
a good-night kiss, John Avery, after giving it, laid his hands upon her
head and blessed her.

This is an atom: 
"The God that fed me all my life long, the Angel that redeemed me from
all evil, bless the maid!  The peace of God, which passeth all
understanding, keep thy heart and mind, through Jesus Christ our Lord;
and the blessing of God Almighty,--the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost--be upon thee, and remain with thee always!"

This is an atom: 
So he "let her depart with this blessing."  Let her depart--to walk the
thorny path of which he had reached the end, to climb the painful steeps
of which he stood at the summit, to labour along the weary road which he
would tread no more.  Let her depart!  The God who had fed him had manna
in store for her,--the Angel who had redeemed him was strong, enough,
and tender enough, to carry this lamb in His bosom.

This is an atom: 
Barbara noted that his step was slower even than had been usual with him
of late.  It struck her, too, that his hair was whiter than she had ever
noticed it before.

This is an atom: 
"Be you aweary this even, Master?"

This is an atom: 
"Something, good maid," he answered with a smile.  "Even as a traveller
may well be that hath but another furlong of his journey."

This is an atom: 
Another furlong!  Was it more than another step?  Barbara went upstairs
with him, to relieve him of the light burden of the candle.

This is an atom: 
"Good night, Master!  Metrusteth your sleep shall give you good
refreshing."

This is an atom: 
"Good night, my maid," said he.  "I wish thee the like.  There shall be
good rest up yonder."

This is an atom: 
Her eyes filled with tears as she turned away.  Was it selfish that her
wish was half a prayer,--that he might be kept a little longer from
_that_ rest?

This is an atom: 
She waited longer than usual before she tapped at his door the next
morning.  It was seven o'clock--a very late hour for rising in the
sixteenth century--when, receiving no answer, Barbara went softly into
the room and unfastened the shutters as quietly as she could.  No need
for the care and the silence!  There was good rest up yonder.

This is an atom: 
The shutters were drawn back, and the April sunlight streamed brightly
in upon a still, dead face.

This is an atom: 
Deep indeed was the mourning: but it was for themselves, not for him.
He was safe in the Golden Land, with his children and his Isoult--all
gone before him to that good rest.  What cause could there be for grief
that the battle was won, and that the tired soldier had laid aside his
armour?

This is an atom: 
But there was need enough for grief as concerned the two survivors,--for
Barbara and little Clare, left alone in the cold, wide world, with
nothing before them but a mournful and wearisome journey, and Enville
Court the dreaded end of it.

This is an atom: 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an atom: 
Note 1.  So lately as 1601, an Act of Parliament forbade men to ride in
coaches, as an effeminate practice.

This is an atom: 
Note 2.  This was "His Holiness' sentence," of which the Armada was "in
execution."  See note, p.

This is an atom: 
Note 3.  The names, and date of marriage, of Walter Avery and Orige
Williams, are taken from the Bodmin Register.  In every other respect
they are fictitious characters.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER TWO.

This is an atom: 
ON THE BORDER OF MARTON MERE.

This is an atom: 
"Thou too must tread, as we trod, a way
  Thorny, and bitter, and cold, and grey."

This is an atom: 
_Miss Muloch_.

This is an atom: 
It was drawing towards the dusk of a bright day early in May.  The
landscape was not attractive, at least to a tired traveller.  It was a
dreary waste of sandhills, diversified by patches of rough grass, and a
few stunted bushes, all leaning away from the sea, as though they wanted
to get as far from it as their small opportunities allowed; on one side
foamed the said grey-green expanse of sea; on the other lay a little
lakelet, shining in the setting sun: in front, at some distance, a
rivulet ran from the lake to the sea.  On the nearer side of the brook
lay a little village; while on the further bank was a large, well-kept
park, in which stood a grey quadrangular mansion.  Beyond the park,
nearly as far as the eye could reach, stretched a wide, dreary swamp,
bounded only by the sea on the one hand and the lake on the other.  The
only pretty or pleasant features in the landscape were the village and
park; and little could be seen of those for intervening sandhills.

This is an atom: 
The lake was Marton Mere; the swamp was Marton Moss; and the district
was the Fylde of Lancashire.  The County Palatine was renowned, at that
time, in the eyes of the Londoners, for its air, which was "subtile and
piercing," without any "gross vapours nor foggie mists;" for the
abundance and excellence of its cattle, which were sent even then to the
metropolis; for the plentiful variety of its provisions; for its
magnificent woods, "preserved by gentlemen for beauty," to such an
extent that no wood was used for fuel, and its place was supplied by
"sea-coal" and turf; for its numerous churches, "in no part of the land
more in proportion to the inhabitants."  But the good qualities of the
County Palatine were not likely to be appreciated by our weary
travellers.

This is an atom: 
The travellers were three in number:--a short, thick-set man, in a coat
of frieze as rough as his surroundings; a woman, and a child; lastly
came a pack-horse, bearing a quantity of luggage.

This is an atom: 
"Eh me!" ejaculated Barbara Polwhele, with a weary sigh.  "Master, doth
any man live hereaway?"

This is an atom: 
"Eh?" queried the man, not looking back.

This is an atom: 
Barbara repeated her question.

This is an atom: 
"Ay," said he in a rough voice.

This is an atom: 
"By 'r Lady!" exclaimed Barbara, pityingly.  "What manner of folk be
they, I marvel?"

This is an atom: 
"Me an' th' rest," said the man.

This is an atom: 
"Eh? what, you never--Be we anear Enville Court now?"

This is an atom: 
"O'er yon," replied the man, pointing straight forward with his whip,
and then giving it a sharp crack, as a reminder to the galloways.

This is an atom: 
"What, in the midst of yonder marsh?" cried poor Barbara.

This is an atom: 
Dick gave a hoarse chuckle, but made no other reply.  Barbara's
sensations were coming very near despair.

This is an atom: 
"What call men your name, Master?" she demanded, after some minutes'
gloomy meditation.

This is an atom: 
"Name?" echoed the stolid individual before her.

This is an atom: 
"Ay," said she.

This is an atom: 
"Dick o' Will's o' Mally's o' Robin's o' Joan's o' owd Dick's,"
responded he, in a breath.

This is an atom: 
"Marry La'kin!" exclaimed Barbara, relieving her feelings by recourse to
her favourite epithet.  She took the whole pedigree to be a polysyllabic
name.  "Dear heart, to think of a country where the folk have names as
long as a cart-rope!"

This is an atom: 
"Bab, I am aweary!" said little Clare, rousing up from a nap which she
had taken leaning against Barbara.

This is an atom: 
"And well thou mayest, poor chick!" returned Barbara compassionately;
adding in an undertone,--"Could she ne'er have come so far as Kirkham!"

This is an atom: 
They toiled wearily on after this, until presently Dick o' Will's--I
drop the rest of the genealogy--drew bridle, and looking back, pointed
with his whip to the village which now lay close before them.

This is an atom: 
"See thee!" said he.  "Yon's th' fold."

This is an atom: 
"Yon's what?" demanded Barbara.

This is an atom: 
The word was unintelligible to her, as Dick pronounced it "fowd;" but
had she understood it, she would have been little wiser.  Fold meant to
her a place to pen sheep in, while it signified to Dick an enclosure
surrounded by houses.

This is an atom: 
"What is 't?" responded Dick.  "Why, it's th' fowd."

This is an atom: 
"But what is `fowd'?" asked bewildered Barbara.

This is an atom: 
"Open thy een, wilt thou?" answered Dick cynically.

This is an atom: 
Barbara resigned the attempt to comprehend him, and, unwittingly
obeying, looked at the landscape.

This is an atom: 
Just the village itself was pretty enough.  It was surrounded with
trees, through which white houses peeped out, clustered together on the
bank of the little brook.  The spire of the village church towered up
through the foliage, close to the narrow footbridge; and beside it stood
the parsonage,--a long, low, stone house, embowered in ivy.

This is an atom: 
"Is yonder Enville Court?" asked Barbara, referring to the house in the
park.

This is an atom: 
"Ay," said Dick.

This is an atom: 
"And where dwelleth Master Tremayne?"

This is an atom: 
"Eh?"

This is an atom: 
"Master Tremayne--the parson--where dwelleth he?"

This is an atom: 
"Th' parson?  Why, i' th' parsonage, for sure," said Dick, conclusively.
"Where else would thou have him?"

This is an atom: 
"Ay, in sooth, but which is the parsonage?"

This is an atom: 
"Close by th' church--where would thou have it?"

This is an atom: 
"What, yonder green house, all o'er ivy?"

This is an atom: 
"For sure."

This is an atom: 
They slowly filed into the village, rode past the church and
parsonage,--at which latter Barbara looked lovingly, as to a haven of
comfort--forded the brook, and turned in at the gates of Enville Court.
When they came up to the house, and saw it free of hindering foliage,
she found that it was a stately quadrangle of grey stone, with a stone
terrace round three sides of it, a garden laid out in grim, Dutch square
order, away from the sea; and two or three cottages, with farm-buildings
and stables, grouped behind.  The horses drew up at a side door.

This is an atom: 
"Now!" lethargically said Dick, lumbering off his horse.  "Con ye get
off by yoursen?"

This is an atom: 
"I'll try," grunted the rather indignant Barbara, who considered that
her precious charge, Clare, was being very neglectfully received.  She
sprang down more readily than Dick, and standing on the horse-block,
lifted down little Clare.

This is an atom: 
"Hallo!" said Dick, by way of ringing the bell.

This is an atom: 
A slight stir was heard through the open door, and a young woman
appeared, fresh-looking and smiling-faced.

This is an atom: 
"Mistress Polwhele, I reckon?" she asked.  "An' is this t' little lass?
Eh, God bless thee, little lass!  Come in--thou'rt bound to be aweary."

This is an atom: 
Clare looked up into the girl's pleasant face, and sliding her hand
confidingly into hers, said demurely,--"I'll come."

This is an atom: 
"Dick 'll see to th' gear, Mistress," said the girl.

This is an atom: 
"Thou'd better call Sim, Dick.--I reckon you'd best come wi' me."

This is an atom: 
"What is your name?" asked Barbara, following her guide.

This is an atom: 
"Jennet," said the smiling girl.

This is an atom: 
"Well, Jennet, you are the best thing I have yet seen up hither,"
announced Barbara cynically.

This is an atom: 
"Eh, you've none seen nought yet!" said Jennet, laughing.  "There's
better things here nor me, I'se warrant you."

This is an atom: 
"Humph!" returned Barbara meditatively.  She doubted it very much.

This is an atom: 
Jennet paused at a door, and rapped.  There was no answer; perhaps her
appeal was not heard by those within.  She pushed the door a little
open, saying to Barbara, "There! you'd best go in, happen."

This is an atom: 
So Barbara, putting little Clare before her, went in.

This is an atom: 
It was a large, square, low room, sweet with the perfume of dried roses.
There were four occupants,--two ladies, and two girls.  One of the
ladies sat with her back to the door, trying to catch the last ray of
daylight for her work; the other had dropped asleep.  Evidently neither
had heard Jennet's knock.

This is an atom: 
It was rather an awkward state of things.  Little Clare went a few feet
into the room, stopped, and looked up at Barbara for direction.  At the
same moment the elder girl turned her head and saw them.

This is an atom: 
"Madam!" said Barbara stiffly.

This is an atom: 
"Aunt Rachel!"  [Note 1] said the girl.

This is an atom: 
The lady who sat by the window looked round, and rose.  She was young--
certainly under thirty; but rather stiff and prim, very upright, and not
free from angularity.  She gave the impression that she must have been
born just as she was, in her black satin skirt, dark blue serge kirtle,
unbending buckram cap, whitest and most unruffled of starched frills,--
and have been kept ever since under a glass case.

This is an atom: 
"You are Barbara Polwhele?" she said.

This is an atom: 
Barbara dropped a courtesy, and replied affirmatively.

This is an atom: 
"Sister!" said Mistress Rachel, appealing to the sleeper.

This is an atom: 
No greater difference between two young women could well be imagined,
than that which existed in this instance.  Lady Enville--for she was the
taker of the siesta--was as free from any appearance of angularity or
primness as possible.  Everything about her was soft, delicate, and
graceful.  She was fair in complexion, and very pretty.  She had been
engaged in fancy-work, and it lay upon her lap, held lightly by one
hand, just as it had dropped when she fell asleep.

This is an atom: 
"Sister!" said Rachel again.

This is an atom: 
Lady Enville stirred, sighed, and half opened her eyes.

This is an atom: 
"Here is thy little maid, Sister."

This is an atom: 
Lady Enville opened her blue eyes fully, dropped her work on the floor,
and springing up, caught Clare to her bosom with the most exalted
expressions of delight.

This is an atom: 
"Fragrance of my heart!  My rose of spring!  My gem of beauty!  Art thou
come to me at last, my soul's darling?"

This is an atom: 
Barbara looked on with a grim smile.  Clare sat in perfect silence on
her mother's knee, suffering her caresses, but making no response.

This is an atom: 
"She is not like thee, Sister," observed Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"No, she is like her father," replied Lady Enville, stroking the child's
hair, and kissing her again.  "Medoubteth if she will ever be as
lovesome as I.  I was much better favoured at her years.--Art thou
aweary, sweeting?"

This is an atom: 
At last Clare spoke; but only in an affirmative monosyllable.  Clare's
thoughts were mixed ones.  It was rather nice to sit on that soft velvet
lap, and be petted: but "Bab didn't like her."  And why did not Bab like
her?

This is an atom: 
"Thou hast not called me Mother, my floweret."

This is an atom: 
Clare was too shy for that.  The suggestion distressed her.  To move the
house seemed as near possibility as to frame her lips to say that short
word.  Fortunately for her, Lady Enville's mind never dwelt on a subject
for many seconds at once.  She turned to Barbara.

This is an atom: 
"And how goes it with thee, Barbara?"

This is an atom: 
"Well, and I thank you, Mistress--my Lady, I would say."

This is an atom: 
"Ah!" said Lady Enville, laughing softly.  "I shall alway be Mistress
Walter with thee, I am well assured.  So my father Avery is dead, I
count, or ye had not come?"

This is an atom: 
The question was put in a tone as light and airy as possible.  Clare
listened in surprised vexation.  What did "she" mean by talking of
"Gaffer," in that strange way?--was she not sorry that he was gone away?
Bab was--thought Clare.

This is an atom: 
Barbara's answer was in a very constrained tone.

This is an atom: 
"Ah, well, 'tis to no good fretting," returned Lady Enville, gently
smoothing Clare's hair.  "I cannot abide doole [mourning] and gloomy
faces.  I would have all about me fresh and bright while I am so."

This is an atom: 
This was rather above Clare's comprehension; but looking up at Barbara,
the child saw tears in her eyes.  Her little heart revolted in a moment
from the caressing lady in velvet.  What did she mean by making Bab cry?

This is an atom: 
It was rather a misfortune that at this moment it pleased Lady Enville
to kiss Clare's forehead, and to say--

This is an atom: 
"Art thou ready to love us all, darling?  Thou must know thy sisters,
and ye can play you together, when their tasks be adone.--Margaret!"

This is an atom: 
"Ay, Madam."

This is an atom: 
The elder girl laid down her work, and came to Lady Enville's side.

This is an atom: 
"And thou too, Lucrece.--These be they, sweeting.  Kiss them.  Thou
shalt see Blanche ere it be long."

This is an atom: 
But then Clare's stored-up anger broke out.  The limit of her endurance
had been reached, and shyness was extinguished by vexation.

This is an atom: 
"Get away!" she said, as Margaret bent down to kiss her.  "You are not
my sisters!  I won't kiss you!  I won't call you sisters.  Blanche is my
sister, but not you.  Get away, both of you!"

This is an atom: 
Lady Enville's eyes opened--for her--extremely wide.

This is an atom: 
"Why, what can the child mean?" she exclaimed.  "I can never govern
childre.  Rachel, do--"

This is an atom: 
Barbara was astonished and terrified.  She laid a correcting hand upon
Clare's shoulder.

This is an atom: 
"Mrs Clare, I'm ashamed of you!  Cruel 'shamed, I am!  The ladies will
account that I ne'er learned you behaviour.  Kiss the young damsels
presently [immediately], like a sweet little maid, as you use to be, and
not like a wild blackamoor that ne'er saw governance!"

This is an atom: 
But the matter was taken out of Barbara's hands, as Mistress Rachel
responded to the appeal made to her--not in words, but in solid deed.
She quietly grasped Clare, lifted her from her mother's knee, and,
carrying her to a large closet at one end of the room, shut her inside,
and sat down again with judicial imperturbability.

This is an atom: 
"There you 'bide, child," announced Rachel, from her chair, "until such
time as you shall be sorry for your fault, and desire pardon.--Meg and
Lucrece, come and fold your sewing.  'Tis too dark to make an end
thereof this even."

This is an atom: 
"Good Mistress," entreated poor Barbara in deep dismay, "I beseech you,
leave my little maid come out thence.  She was never thus dealt withal
in all her life afore!"

This is an atom: 
"No was she, [was she not], good wife?" returned Rachel unconcernedly.
"Then the sooner she makes beginning thereof, the better for her.  Ease
your mind; I will keep her in yonder no longer than shall stand with her
good.  Is she oft-times thus trying?"

This is an atom: 
"Never afore knew I no such a thing!" said Barbara emphatically.

This is an atom: 
"Only a little waywardness then, maybe," answered Rachel.  "So much the
better."

This is an atom: 
"Marry, sweet Mistress, the child is hungered and aweary.  Pray you,
forgive her this once!"

This is an atom: 
"Good lack!" plaintively exclaimed Lady Enville.  "I hate discords
around me.  Call Jennet, and bid her take Barbara into the hall, for it
must be nigh rear-supper."

This is an atom: 
Go and sit down comfortably to supper, with her darling shut in a dark
closet!  Barbara would as soon have thought of flying.

This is an atom: 
"Leave her come forth, Rachel," said the child's mother.

This is an atom: 
"I love peace as well as thou, Sister; but I love right better,"
answered Rachel unmovedly.  But she rose and went to the closet.
"Child! art thou yet penitent?"

This is an atom: 
"Am I what?" demanded Clare from within, in a voice which was not
promising for much penitence.

This is an atom: 
"Art thou sorry for thy fault?"

This is an atom: 
"No."

This is an atom: 
"Wilt thou ask pardon?"

This is an atom: 
"No," said Clare sturdily.

This is an atom: 
"Thou seest, Sister, I cannot let her out," decided Rachel, looking
back.

This is an atom: 
In utter despair Barbara appealed to Lady Enville.

This is an atom: 
"Mistress Walter, sure you have never the heart to keep the little maid
shut up in yon hole?  She is cruel weary, the sweeting!--and an-hungered
to boot.  Cause her to come forth, I pray you of your gentleness!"

This is an atom: 
Ah, Barbara!  Appearances were illusive.  There was no heart under the
soft exterior of the one woman, and there was a very tender one, covered
by a crust of rule and propriety, latent in the breast of the other.

This is an atom: 
"Gramercy, Barbara!" said Lady Enville pettishly, with a shrug of her
shoulders.  "I never can deal with childre."

This is an atom: 
"Leave her come forth, and I will deal withal," retorted Barbara
bluntly.

This is an atom: 
"Dear heart!  Rachel, couldst thou not leave her come?  Never mind
waiting till she is sorry.  I shall have never any peace."

This is an atom: 
Rachel laid her hand doubtfully on the latch of the closet door, and
stood considering the matter.

This is an atom: 
Just then another door was softly pushed open, and a little child of
three years old came into the room:--a much prettier child than Clare,
having sky-blue eyes, shining fair hair, a complexion of exquisite
delicacy, pretty regular features, and eyebrows of the surprised type.
She ran up straight to Rachel, and grasped the blue serge kirtle in her
small chubby hand.

This is an atom: 
"Come see my sis'er," was the abrupt announcement.

This is an atom: 
That this little bit of prettiness was queen at Enville Court, might be
seen in Rachel's complacent smile.  She opened the closet door about an
inch.

This is an atom: 
"Art thou yet sorry?"

This is an atom: 
"No," said Clare stubbornly.

This is an atom: 
There was a little pull at the blue kirtle.

This is an atom: 
"Want see my sis'er!" pleaded the baby voice, in tones of some
impatience.

This is an atom: 
"Wilt be a good maid if thou come forth?" demanded Rachel of the culprit
within.

This is an atom: 
"That is as may be," returned Clare insubordinately.

This is an atom: 
"If I leave thee come forth, 'tis not for any thy goodness, but I would
not be hard on thee in the first minute of thy home-coming, and I make
allowance for thy coldness and weariness, that may cause thee to be
pettish."

This is an atom: 
Another little pull warned Rachel to cut short her lecture.

This is an atom: 
"Now, be a good maid!  Come forth, then.  Here is Blanche awaiting
thee."

This is an atom: 
Out came Clare, looking very far from penitent.  But when Blanche
toddled up, put her fat arms round her sister as far as they would go,
and pouted up her little lips for a kiss,--to the astonishment of every
one, Clare burst into tears.  Nobody quite knew why, and perhaps Clare
could hardly have said herself.  Barbara interposed, by coming forward
and taking possession of her, with the apologetic remark--

This is an atom: 
"Fair cruel worn-out she is, poor heart!"

This is an atom: 
And Rachel condoned the affair, with--"Give her her supper, good wife,
and put her abed.  Jennet will show thee all needful."

This is an atom: 
So Clare signalised her first entrance into her new home by rebellion
and penalty.

This is an atom: 
The next morning rose brightly.  Barbara and Jennet came to dress the
four little girls, who all slept in one room; and took them out at once
into the garden.  Clare seemed to have forgotten the episode of the
previous evening, and no one cared to remind her of it.  Margaret had
brought a ball with her, and the children set to work at play, with an
amount of activity and interest which they would scarcely have bestowed
upon work.  Barbara and Jennet sat down on a wooden seat which ran round
the trunk of a large ash-tree, and Jennet, pulling from her pocket a
pair of knitting-needles and a ball of worsted, began to ply the former
too quickly for the eye to follow.

This is an atom: 
"Of a truth, I would I had some matter of work likewise," observed
Barbara; "I have been used to work hard, early and late, nor it liketh
me not to sit with mine hands idle.  Needs must that I pray my Lady of
some task belike."

This is an atom: 
"Do but say the like unto Mistress Rachel," said Jennet, laughing, "and
I warrant thee thou'lt have work enough."

This is an atom: 
"Mistress Rachel o'erseeth the maids work?"

This is an atom: 
"There's nought here but hoo [she] does o'ersee," replied Jennet.

This is an atom: 
"She keepeth house, marry, by my Lady's direction?"

This is an atom: 
"Hoo does not get much direction, I reckon," said Jennet.

This is an atom: 
"What, my Lady neither makes nor meddles?"

This is an atom: 
Jennet laughed.  "I ne'er saw her make yet so much as an apple turno'er.
As for tapestry work, and such, hoo makes belike.  But I'll just tell
thee:--Sir Thomas is our master, see thou.  Well, his wife's his
mistress.  And Mistress Rachel's her mistress.  And Mistress Blanche is
Mistress Rachel's mistress.  Now then, thou knowest somewhat thou didn't
afore."

This is an atom: 
"And who is Mistress Blanche's mistress or master belike?" demanded
Barbara, laughing in her turn.

This is an atom: 
"Nay, I've getten to th' top," said Jennet.  "I can go no fur'."

This is an atom: 
"There'll be a master some of these days, I cast no doubt," observed
Barbara, drily.

This is an atom: 
"Happen," returned Jennet.  "But 'tis a bit too soon yet, I reckon.--
Mrs Meg, yon's the breakfast bell."

This is an atom: 
Margaret caught the ball from Clare, and pocketed it, and the whole
party went into the hall for breakfast.  Here the entire family
assembled, down to the meanest scullion-lad.  Jennet took Clare's hand,
and led her up to the high table, at which Mistress Rachel had already
taken her seat, while Sir Thomas and Lady Enville were just entering
from the door behind it.

This is an atom: 
"Ha! who cometh here?" asked Sir Thomas, cheerily.  "My new daughter, I
warrant.  Come hither, little maid!"

This is an atom: 
Clare obeyed rather shyly.  Her step-father set her on his knee, kissed
her, stroked her hair with a rather heavy hand, and bade her "be a good
lass and serve God well, and he would be good father to her."  Clare was
not sorry when the ordeal was over, and she found herself seated between
Margaret and Barbara.  Sir Thomas glanced round the table, where an
empty place was left on the form, just opposite Clare.

This is an atom: 
"Where is Jack?" he inquired.

This is an atom: 
"Truly, I know not," said Lady Enville languidly.

This is an atom: 
"I bade him arise at four of the clock," observed Rachel briskly.

This is an atom: 
"And saw him do it?" asked Sir Thomas, with an amused expression.

This is an atom: 
"Nay, in very deed,--I had other fish to fry."

This is an atom: 
"Then, if Jack be not yet abed, I am no prophet."

This is an atom: 
"Thou art no prophet, brother Tom, whether or no," declared Rachel.  "I
pray thee of some of that herring."

This is an atom: 
While Rachel was being helped to the herring, a slight noise was audible
at the door behind, and the next minute, tumbling into his place with a
somersault, a boy of eleven suddenly appeared in the hitherto vacant
space between Rachel and Lucrece.

This is an atom: 
"Ah Jack, Jack!" reprimanded Sir Thomas.

This is an atom: 
"Salt, Sir?" suggested Jack, demurely.

This is an atom: 
"What hour of the clock did thine Aunt bid thee rise, Jack?"

This is an atom: 
"Well, Sir," responded Jack, screwing up one eye, as if the effort of
memory were painful, "as near as I may remember, 'twas about one hundred
and eighty minutes to seven of the clock."

This is an atom: 
"Thou wilt come to ill, Jack, as sure as sure," denounced Aunt Rachel,
solemnly.

This is an atom: 
"I am come to breakfast, Aunt, and I shall come to dinner," remarked
Jack: "that is as sure as sure."

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas leaned back in his chair and laughed heartily, bidding Jack
help himself; while Rachel shook her head ominously over Jack's future.
Jack stood up, surveyed the table, and proceeded to make a wide gash in
an enormous pie.  Just as he was laying down knife and spoon, and
retiring with his spoils, he caught a glimpse of Clare, who sat studying
him in some trepidation and much curiosity.

This is an atom: 
"Hallo! who are you?" was Jack's unceremonious greeting.

This is an atom: 
"Wilt thou ne'er learn to behave thyself, lad?" corrected Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"You see, Aunt, none never learned me yet," returned Jack coolly;
looking at Clare in a manner which said, "I await your answer."

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas good-naturedly replied for her.

This is an atom: 
"'Tis thy new sister, my lad,--little Clare Avery.  Play none of thy
tricks on her, Jack."

This is an atom: 
"My tricks, Sir?" demanded Jack with an air of innocent astonishment.

This is an atom: 
"I know thee, lad!" said Sir Thomas shortly, but good humouredly.

This is an atom: 
Jack proceeded to make short work of the pie, but kept his eyes on
Clare.

This is an atom: 
"Now, little maids," said Rachel, when they rose from the table, "I will
hear, you your tasks in an hour hence.  Till the clock strike, ye may go
into the garden."

This is an atom: 
"May we have some cakes with us, Aunt Rachel?" inquired Jack demurely.

This is an atom: 
"Cake!" echoed Blanche, clapping her little fat hands.

This is an atom: 
"Thou!" said Rachel.  "Art thou a maid?  I have nought to do with thy
tasks.  Be they ready for Master Tremayne?"

This is an atom: 
Jack turned up the whites of his eyes, and turned down the corners of
his mouth, in a style which exhibited a very emphatic No.

This is an atom: 
"Go and study them, then, this minute," said his Aunt.

This is an atom: 
The party separated, Jack putting on a look which was the embodiment of
despair; but Sir Thomas, calling Margaret back, put into her hands the
plate of small cakes; bidding her take them to the garden and divide
them among the children.

This is an atom: 
"Brother, Brother!" remonstrated Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"Tut! the cakes will do them no harm," said he carelessly.  "There are
but a dozen or the like."

This is an atom: 
Margaret went first towards the garden, carrying the plate, Clare and
Blanche following.  As they reached the terrace, Lucrece overtook them,
going on about a yard in advance of Margaret.  When the latter turned
her head to call Blanche to "come on," Clare, to her utter amazement,
saw Lucrece stop, and, as Margaret passed her, silently and deftly dip
her hand into the plate, and transfer two of the little cakes to her
pocket.  The action was so promptly and delicately performed, leaving
Margaret entirely unconscious of it, that in all probability it was not
the first of its kind.

This is an atom: 
Clare was intensely shocked.  Was Lucrece a thief?

This is an atom: 
Margaret sat down on a grassy bank, and counted out the cakes.  There
were eleven.

This is an atom: 
"How is this?" she asked, looking perplexed.  "There were thirteen of
these, I am well assured, for I counted them o'er as I came out of hall.
Who has taken two?"

This is an atom: 
"Not I," said Clare shortly.

This is an atom: 
Blanche shook her curly head; Lucrece, silently but calmly, held out
empty hands.  So, thought Clare, she is a liar as well, as a thief.

This is an atom: 
"They must be some whither," said Margaret, quietly; "and I know where
it is like: Lucrece, I do verily believe they are in thy pocket."

This is an atom: 
"Dost thou count me a thief, Meg?" retorted Lucrece.

This is an atom: 
"By no manner of means, without thou hast the chance," answered Margaret
satirically, but still quietly.  "Very well,--thou hast chosen thy
share,--take it.  Three for each of us three, and two over.  Shall we
give them to Jack?  What say ye?"

This is an atom: 
"Jack!" cried Blanche, dancing about on the grass.

This is an atom: 
Clare assented shyly, and she and Blanche received their three cakes
each.

This is an atom: 
"Must I have none, Meg?" demanded Lucrece in an injured tone.

This is an atom: 
"Oh ay! keep what thou hast," said Margaret, calmly munching the first
of her own three cakes.

This is an atom: 
"Who said I had any?"

This is an atom: 
"I said it.  I know thee, as Father saith to Jack.  Thou hast made thy
bed,--go lie thereon."

This is an atom: 
Lucrece marched slowly away, looking highly indignant; but before she
was quite out of sight, the others saw her slip her hand into her
pocket, bring out one of the little cakes, and bite it in two.  Margaret
laughed when she saw Clare's look of shocked solemnity.

This is an atom: 
"I said she had them,--the sly-boots!" was her only comment.

This is an atom: 
Clare finished her cakes, and ran off to Barbara, who, seated under the
ash-tree, had witnessed the whole scene.

This is an atom: 
"Bab, I will not play me with yonder Lucrece.  She tells lies, and is a
thief."

This is an atom: 
"Marry La'kin, my poor lamb!" sighed Barbara.  "My mind sorely misgiveth
me that I have brought thee into a den of thieves.  Eh me, if the good
Master had but lived a while longer!  Of a truth, the Lord's ways be
passing strange."

This is an atom: 
Clare had run off again to Margaret, and the last sentence was not
spoken to her.  But it was answered by somebody.

This is an atom: 
"Which of the Lord's ways, Barbara Polwhele?"

This is an atom: 
"Sir?" exclaimed Barbara, looking up surprisedly into the grave, though
kindly face of a tall, dark-haired man in clerical garb.  "I was but--
eh, but yon eyes!  'Tis never Master Robin?"

This is an atom: 
Mr Tremayne's smile replied sufficiently that it was.

This is an atom: 
"And is yonder little Clare Avery?" he asked, with a tender inflection
in his voice.  "Walter's child,--my brother Walter!"

This is an atom: 
"Ay, Master Robin, yon is Mistress Clare; and you being shepherd of this
flock hereaway, I do adjure you, look well to this little lamb, for I am
sore afeard she is here fallen amongst wolves."

This is an atom: 
"I am not the Shepherd, good friend,--only one of the Shepherd's
herd-lads.  But I will look to the lamb as He shall speed me.  And which
of the Lord's ways is so strange unto thee, Barbara?"

This is an atom: 
"Why, to think that our dear, good Master should die but now, and leave
the little lamb to be cast in all this peril."

This is an atom: 
"Then--`Some of the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth'--doth the
verse run thus in thy Bible, Barbara?"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, not so: but can you understand the same Master Robin?"

This is an atom: 
"By no means.  Wherefore should I?"

This is an atom: 
Barbara made no answer beyond an appealing look.

This is an atom: 
"`He knoweth the way that I take.'  If I know not so much as one step
thereof, what matter?  I shall have light to see the next step ere I
must set down my foot.  That is enough, Barbara, for `such as keep His
covenant,' and I have ever counted thee amongst them."

This is an atom: 
"Eh, Master Robin, but 'twere easier done to walk in darkness one's
self, than to see yon little pet lamb--"

This is an atom: 
And Barbara's voice faltered.

This is an atom: 
"Hath somewhat troubled thee specially at this time?"

This is an atom: 
In answer, she told him what she had just seen.

This is an atom: 
"And I do trust, Master Robin, I have not ill done to say this unto you,
but of a truth I am diseased [uneasy, anxious] touching my jewel, lest
she fall into the like evil courses, being to dwell here."

This is an atom: 
"Thou hast not ill done, friend; nor will I neglect the warning, trust
me."

This is an atom: 
"I thank you much, Master.  And how doth good Mistress Thekla?  Verily I
am but evil-mannered to be thus long ere I ask it."

This is an atom: 
"She is well, and desiring much to see thee."

This is an atom: 
"And your childre, Master Robin,--have you not?"

This is an atom: 
"I have five childre, Barbara, two sons and three daughters; but of them
Christ hath housen four in His garner, and hath left but one in my
sight.  And that seemed unto us a very strange way; yet was it mercy and
truth."

This is an atom: 
"Eh, but I could ne'er repine at a babe's dying!" said Barbara, shaking
her head.  "Do but think what they 'scape of this weary world's
troubles, Master Robin."

This is an atom: 
"Ah, Barbara, 'tis plain thou never hadst a child," said Mr Tremayne,
sighing.  "I grant all thou hast said.  And yet, when it cometh to the
pass, the most I can do is to lift mine head and hold my peace, `because
God did it.'  God witteth best how to try us all."

This is an atom: 
"Nay, if He would but not try yon little lambkin!"

This is an atom: 
"An unhappy prayer, Barbara; for, that granted, she should never come
forth as gold.--But I must be on my way to give Jack his Latin lesson.
When thou canst find thy way to my dwelling, all we shall be full fain
to see thee.  Good morrow."

This is an atom: 
When Clare was undergoing her ordeal in the schoolroom, an hour later,
Barbara set out on her visit to the parsonage.  But she missed her way
through the park, and instead of coming out of the great gates, near the
foot-bridge, she found herself at a little gate, opening on the road,
from which neither church nor village could be seen as landmarks.  There
was no cottage in sight at which to ask the road to the parsonage.
While Barbara stood and looked round her, considering the matter, she
perceived a boy of about twelve years old slowly approaching her from
the right hand,--evidently a gentleman's son, from his dress, which,
though very simple, was of materials indicative of good birth.  He had
long dark brown hair, which curled over his shoulders, and almost hid
his face, bent down over a large book, for he was reading as he walked.
Barbara waited until he came up to her.

This is an atom: 
"Give you good morrow, Master!  I be loth to come betwixt you and your
studies, but my need presseth me to pray of you the way unto Master
Tremayne's house the parson?"

This is an atom: 
The lad started on hearing a voice, hastily closed his book, and lifted
a pair of large, dreamy brown eyes to Barbara's face.  But he seemed
quite at a loss to recall what he had been asked to do.

This is an atom: 
"You would know?"--he said inquiringly.

This is an atom: 
"I would know, young Master," returned Barbara boldly, "if your name be
not Tremayne?"

This is an atom: 
"Ay so," assented the boy, with a rather surprised look.  "My name is
Arthur Tremayne."  [A fictitious person.]

This is an atom: 
"And you be son unto Master Tremayne the parson?"

This is an atom: 
"Truly."

This is an atom: 
"Verily I guessed so much, for his eyes be in your head," said Barbara
quaintly.  "But your mouth and nose be Mrs Thekla's.  Eh, dear heart,
what changes life bringeth!  Why, it seemeth me but yestre'en that your
father was no bigger than you.  And every whit as much given to his
book, I warrant you.  Pray you, is my mistress your mother at home?"

This is an atom: 
"Ay, you shall find her there now," said the boy, as he tucked the big
book under his arm, and began to walk on in Barbara's company.  "I count
you be our old friend, Barbara Polwhele, that is come with little
Mistress Clare?  My mother will be fain to see you."

This is an atom: 
Barbara was highly gratified to find that Arthur Tremayne had heard of
her already.  The two trudged onwards together, and in a few minutes
reached the ivy-covered parsonage, standing in its pretty flower-garden.
Arthur preceded Barbara into the house, laid down his book on the hall
window-seat, and opening a door which led to the back part of the house,
appealed to an unseen person within.

This is an atom: 
"Mother! here is Mistress Barbara Polwhele."

This is an atom: 
"Barbara Polwhele!" said a voice in reply,--a voice which Barbara had
not heard for nineteen years, yet which time had so little altered that
she recognised at once the Thekla Rose of old.  And in another moment
Mrs Tremayne stood before her.

This is an atom: 
Her aspect was more changed than her voice.  The five terrible years of
the Marian persecution had swept over her head in early youth, and their
bitter anxieties and forebodings left her, at the age of nineteen, a
white, wan, slender, delicate girl.  But now a like number of years,
spent in calm, happy work, had left their traces also, and Mrs Tremayne
looked what she was, a gentle, contented woman of thirty-eight, with
more bloom on her cheek than she had ever worn in youth, and the piteous
expression of distressed suspense entirely gone from her eyes.

This is an atom: 
"Eh, Mistress Thekla!" was Barbara's greeting.

This is an atom: 
"I be cruel glad to see you.  Methinks you be gone so many years younger
as you must needs be elder."

This is an atom: 
"Nay, truly, for I were then but a babe in the cradle," was the laughing
answer.  "Thou art a losenger [flatterer], Barbara."

This is an atom: 
"In very deed," returned Barbara inconsistently, "I could have known you
any whither."

This is an atom: 
"And me also?" demanded another voice, as a little lively old lady
trotted out of the room which Mrs Tremayne had just left.  "Shouldst
thou have known me any whither, Barbara Polwhele?"

This is an atom: 
"Marry La'kin! if 'tis not Mistress Rose!"  [Name fact, character
fictitious.]

This is an atom: 
"Who but myself?  I dwell with Thekla since I am widow.  And I make the
cakes, as Arthur knows," added Mrs Rose, cheerily, patting her
grandson's head; "but if I should go hence, there should be a famine,
_ma foi_!"

This is an atom: 
"A famine of _pain d'epices_" assented Mrs Tremayne, smiling.  "Ah,
Mother dear, thou spoilest the lad."

This is an atom: 
"Who ever knew a grandame to do other?" observed Barbara.  "More
specially the only one."

This is an atom: 
"The only one!" echoed his mother, softly, stroking his long hair.
"There be four other, Barbara,--not lost, but waiting."

This is an atom: 
"Now, Barbara, come in hither," said Mrs Rose, bustling back into the
room, apparently desirous of checking any sad thoughts on the part of
her daughter; "sit thou down, and tell us all about the little Clare,
and the dear Master Avery, and all.  I listen and mix my cake, all one."

This is an atom: 
Barbara followed her, and found herself in the kitchen.  She had not
done wondering at the change--not in Mrs Tremayne, but in her mother.
Nineteen years before, Barbara had known Marguerite Rose, a crushed,
suffering woman, with no shadow of mirth about her.  It seemed unnatural
and improper to hear her laugh.  But Mrs Rose's nature was that of a
child,--simple and versatile: she lived in the present, whether for joy
or pain.

This is an atom: 
Mrs Rose finished gathering her materials, and proceeded to mix her
_pain d'epices_, or Flemish gingerbread, while Mrs Tremayne made
Barbara sit down in a large chair furnished with soft cushions.  Arthur
came too, having picked up his big book, and seated himself in the
window-seat with it, his long hair falling over his face as he bent down
over it but whether he were reading or listening was known only to
himself.

This is an atom: 
The full account of John Avery's end was given to these his dearest
friends, and there was a good deal of conversation about other members
of the family: and Barbara heard, to her surprise, that a cousin of
Clare, a child rather older than herself, was shortly coming to live at
the parsonage.  Lysken van Barnevelt [a fictitious person], like Clare,
was an only child and an orphan; and Mr Tremayne purposed to pay his
debt to the Averys by the adoption of Frances Avery's child.  But
Barbara was rather dismayed when she heard that Lysken would not at
first be able to talk to her cousin, since her English was of the most
fragmentary description.

This is an atom: 
"She will soon learn," said Mrs Tremayne.

This is an atom: 
"And until she shall learn, I only can talk to her," added Mrs Rose,
laughing.  "_Ay de mi_!  I must pull up my Flemish out of my brains.  It
is so deep down, I do wonder if it will come.  It is--let me see!--
forty, fifty--_ma foi_! 'tis nigh sixty years since I talk Flemish with
my father!"

This is an atom: 
"And now, tell us, what manner of child is Clare?" asked Mrs Tremayne.

This is an atom: 
"The sweetest little maid in all the world, and of full good conditions
[disposition], saving only that she lacketh breeding [education]
somewhat."

This is an atom: 
"The which Mistress Rachel shall well furnish her withal.  She is a
throughly good teacher.  But I will go and see the sweeting, so soon as
I may."

This is an atom: 
"Now, Mrs Thekla, of your goodness, do me to wit what manner of folk be
these that we be fallen in withal?  It were easier for me to govern both
Mrs Clare and mine own self, if I might but, know somewhat thereof
aforetime."

This is an atom: 
"Truly, good friend, they be nowise ill folk," said Mrs Tremayne, with
a quiet smile.  "Sir Thomas is like to be a good father unto the child,
for he hath a kindly nature.  Only, for godliness, I fear I may not say
over much.  But he is an upright man, and a worthy, as men go in this
world.  And for my Lady his wife, you know her as well as I."

This is an atom: 
"Marry La'kin, and if you do love her no better!--"

This is an atom: 
"She is but young," said Mrs Tremayne, excusingly.

This is an atom: 
"What heard I?" inquired Mrs Rose, looking up from her cookery.  "I did
think thou hadst been a Christian woman, Barbara Polwhele."

This is an atom: 
"Nay, verily, Mistress Rose!--what mean you?" demanded the astonished
Barbara.

This is an atom: 
"_Bon_!--Is it not the second part of the duty of a Christian woman to
love her neighbour as herself?"

This is an atom: 
"Good lack! 'tis not in human nature," said Barbara, bluntly.  "If we be
no Christians short of that, there be right few Christians in all the
world, Mistress mine."

This is an atom: 
"So there be," was the reply.  "Is it not?"

This is an atom: 
"Truly, good friend, this is not in nature," said Mrs Tremayne, gently.
"It is only in grace."

This is an atom: 
"Then in case it so be, is there no grace?" asked Barbara in a slightly
annoyed tone.

This is an atom: 
"Who am I, that I should judge?" was the meek answer.  "Yet methinks
there must be less grace than nature."

This is an atom: 
"Well!--and of Mistress Rachel, what say you?"

This is an atom: 
"Have you a care that you judge her not too harshly.  She is, I know,
somewhat forbidding on the outside, yet she hath a soft heart, Barbara."

This is an atom: 
"I am thankful to hear the same, for I had not so judged," was Barbara's
somewhat acrid answer.

This is an atom: 
"Ah, she showeth the worst on the outside."

This is an atom: 
"And for the childre?  I love not yon Lucrece.--Now, Mistress Rose, have
a care your cakes be well mingled, and snub not me."

This is an atom: 
"Ah! there spake the conscience," said Mrs Rose, laughing.

This is an atom: 
"I never did rightly understand Lucrece," answered her daughter.  "For
Margaret, she is plain and open enough; a straightforward, truthful
maiden, that men may trust.  But for Lucrece--I never felt as though I
knew her.  There is that in her--be it pride, be it shamefacedness, call
it as you will--that is as a wall in the way."

This is an atom: 
"I call it deceitfulness, Thekla," said her mother decidedly.

This is an atom: 
"I trust not so, Mother! yet I have feared--"

This is an atom: 
"Time will show," said Mrs Rose, filling her moulds with the compound
which was to turn out _pain d'epices_.

This is an atom: 
"Mistress Blanche, belike, showeth not what her conditions shall be,"
remarked Barbara.

This is an atom: 
"She is a lovesome little maid as yet," said Mrs Tremayne.  "Mefeareth
she shall be spoiled as she groweth toward womanhood, both with praising
of her beauty and too much indulging of her fantasies."

This is an atom: 
"And now, what say you to Master Jack?" demanded Barbara in some
trepidation.  "Is he like to play ugsome [ugly, disagreeable] tricks on
Mrs Clare, think you?"

This is an atom: 
"Jack--ah, poor Jack!" replied Mrs Tremayne.

This is an atom: 
Barbara looked up in some surprise.  Jack seemed to her a most unlikely
subject for the compassionate ejaculation.

This is an atom: 
"And dost thou marvel that I say, `Poor Jack'?  It is because I have
known men of his conditions aforetime, and I have ever noted that either
they do go fast to wrack, or else they be set in the hottest furnace of
God's disciplining.  I know not which shall be the way with Jack.  But
how so,--poor Jack!"

This is an atom: 
"But what deem you his conditions, in very deed?"

This is an atom: 
"Why, there is not a soul in all the village that loveth not Jack, and I
might well-nigh say, not one that hath not holpen him at some pinch,
whereto his reckless ways have brought him.  If the lacings of satin
ribbon be gone from Mistress Rachel's best gown, and the cat be found
with them tied all delicately around her paws and neck, and her very
tail,--'tis Jack hath done it.  If Margaret go about with a paper pinned
to the tail of her gown, importing that she is a thief and a traitor to
the Queen's Highness,--'tis Jack hath pinned it on when she saw him not.
If some rare book from Sir Thomas his library be found all open on the
garden walk, wet and ruinated,--'tis Jack.  If Mistress Rachel be
astepping into her bed, and find the sheets and blankets all awry, so
that she cannot compass it till all is pulled in pieces and turned
aright, she hath no doubt to say, 'tis Jack.  And yet once I say, Poor
Jack!  If he be to come unto good, mefeareth the furnace must needs be
heated fiercely.  Yet after all, what am I, that I should say it?  God
hath a thousand ways to fetch His lost sheep home."

This is an atom: 
"But is he verily ill-natured?"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, in no wise.  He hath as tender a heart as any lad ever I saw.  I
have known him to weep bitterly over aught that hath touched his heart.
Trust me, while I cast no doubt he shall play many a trick on little
Clare, yet no sooner shall he see her truly sorrowful thereat, than Jack
shall turn comforter, nor go not an inch further."

This is an atom: 
Barbara was beginning another question, of which she had plenty more to
ask, when she saw that the clock pointed to a quarter to eleven, which
was dinner-time at Enville Court.  There was barely time to reach the
house, and she took leave hastily, declining Mrs Tremayne's invitation
to stay and dine at the parsonage.

This is an atom: 
When she entered the hall, she found the household already assembled,
and the sewers bringing in a smoking baron of beef.  At the upper end
Lady Enville was delicately arranging the folds of her crimson satin
dress; the little girls were already seated; and Mistress Rachel, with
brown holland apron and cuffs, stood with a formidable carving-knife in
her hand, ready to begin an attack upon the beef.  The carving was
properly Lady Enville's prerogative; but as with all things which gave
her trouble, she preferred to delegate it to her sister-in-law.

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas came in late, and said grace hastily.  The Elizabethan grace
was not limited to half-a-dozen words.  It took about as long as family
prayers usually do now.  Jack, in his usual style, came scampering in
just when grace was finished.

This is an atom: 
"Good sooth!  I have had such discourse with Master Tremayne," said Sir
Thomas.  "He hath the strangest fantasies.  Only look you--"

This is an atom: 
"A shive of beef, Sister?" interpolated Rachel, who had no notion of
allowing the theoretical to take precedence of the practical.

This is an atom: 
Lady Enville languidly declined anything so gross as beef.  She would
take a little--very little--of the venison pasty.

This is an atom: 
"I'll have beef, Aunt!" put in unseasonable Jack.

This is an atom: 
"Wilt thou have manners?" severely returned Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"Where shall I find them, Aunt?" coolly inquired Jack, letting his eyes
rove about among the dishes.  "May I help you likewise?"

This is an atom: 
"Behave thyself, Jack!" said his father, laughing.

This is an atom: 
The rebuke was neutralised by the laughter.  Rachel went on carving in
dignified silence.

This is an atom: 
"Would you think it?" resumed Sir Thomas, when everybody was helped, and
conversation free to flow.  --'So bandaged, and hampered, and hemmed
in,' groaned he, 'with thousand requisitions, obligations, straps,
tatters, and tagrags, I can neither see nor move: not my own am I, but
the World's; and Time flies fast, and Heaven is high, and Hell is
deep: Man! bethink thee, if thou hast power of Thought!

This is an atom: 
Why not; what binds me here? Want, want!

This is an atom: 
--Ha, of what? Will all the shoe-wages under the Moon ferry me
across into that far Land of Light?

This is an atom: 
Only Meditation can, and devout Prayer to God. I will to the woods: the
hollow of a tree will lodge me, wild berries feed me; and for
Clothes, cannot I stitch myself one perennial suit of Leather!'

This is an atom: 
"Historical Oil-painting," continues Teufelsdrockh, "is one of the
Arts I never practiced; therefore shall I not decide whether this
subject were easy of execution on the canvas.

This is an atom: 
Yet often has it seemed to me as if such first outflashing of man's
Freewill, to lighten, more and more into Day, the Chaotic Night
that threatened to engulf him in its hindrances and its horrors,
were properly the only grandeur there is in History.

This is an atom: 
Let some living Angelo or Rosa, with
  seeing eye and understanding heart, picture
  George Fox on that morning, when he
  spreads out his cutting-board for
  the last time, and cuts cowhides by unwonted
  patterns, and stitches them together into one continuous all-including
Case, the farewell service of his awl!

This is an atom: 
Stitch away, thou noble Fox:
every prick of that little instrument is pricking into the heart
of Slavery, and World-worship, and the Mammon-god.

This is an atom: 
Thy elbows jerk, as in strong swimmer-strokes, and every stroke is bearing
thee across the Prison-ditch, within which Vanity holds her Workhouse and
Ragfair, into lands of true Liberty; were the work done, there is in
broad Europe one Free Man, and thou art he!

This is an atom: 
"Thus from the lowest depth there is a path to the loftiest height; and
for the Poor also a Gospel has been published. Surely if, as D'Alembert
asserts, my illustrious namesake, Diogenes, was the greatest man of
Antiquity, only that he wanted Decency, then by stronger reason is George
Fox the greatest of the Moderns, and greater than Diogenes himself: for
he too stands on the adamantine basis of his Manhood, casting
aside all props and shoars; yet not, in half-savage Pride, undervaluing
the Earth; valuing it rather, as a place to yield him warmth and food,
he looks Heavenward from his Earth, and dwells in an element of Mercy
and Worship, with a still Strength, such as the Cynic's Tub did
nowise witness. Great, truly, was that Tub; a temple from which man's
dignity and divinity was scornfully preached abroad: but greater
is the Leather Hull, for the same sermon was preached there, and
not in Scorn but in Love."

This is an atom: 
George Fox's "perennial suit," with all that it held, has been worn
quite into ashes for nigh two centuries: why, in a discussion on
the _Perfectibility of Society_, reproduce it now?

This is an atom: 
Not out of blind sectarian partisanship: Teufelsdrockh, himself is no
Quaker; with all his pacific tendencies, did not we see him, in
that scene at the North Cape, with the Archangel Smuggler, exhibit
fire-arms?

This is an atom: 
For us, aware of his deep Sansculottism, there is more meant in
this passage than meets the ear.

This is an atom: 
At the same time, who can avoid smiling at the earnestness and Boeotian
simplicity (if indeed there be not an underhand satire in it),
with which that "Incident" is here brought forward; and, in the
Professor's ambiguous way, as clearly perhaps as he durst in
Weissnichtwo, recommended to imitation!

This is an atom: 
Does Teufelsdrockh anticipate that, in this age of refinement, any
considerable class of the community, by way of testifying against
the "Mammon-god," and escaping from what he calls "Vanity's Workhouse
and Ragfair," where doubtless some of them are toiled and whipped
and hoodwinked sufficiently,--will sheathe themselves in close-fitting
cases of Leather?

This is an atom: 
The idea is ridiculous in the extreme. Will Majesty lay aside its robes
of state, and Beauty its frills and train-gowns, for a second skin
of tanned hide?

This is an atom: 
By which change Huddersfield and Manchester, and Coventry and Paisley, and
the Fancy-Bazaar, were reduced to hungry solitudes; and only Day
and Martin could profit.

This is an atom: 
For neither would Teufelsdrockh's mad daydream, here as we presume
covertly intended, of levelling Society (_levelling_ it indeed
with a vengeance, into one huge drowned marsh!)

This is an atom: 
, and so attaining the political effects of Nudity without its frigorific
or other consequences,--be thereby realized.

This is an atom: 
Would not the rich man purchase a waterproof suit of Russia Leather;
and the high-born Belle step forth in red or azure morocco, lined
with shamoy: the black cowhide being left to the Drudges and
Gibeonites of the world; and so all the old Distinctions be
re-established?

This is an atom: 
Or has the Professor his own deeper intention; and laughs in his
sleeve at our strictures and glosses, which indeed are but a part
thereof?

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER II. CHURCH-CLOTHES.

This is an atom: 
Not less questionable is his Chapter on _Church-Clothes_, which has
the farther distinction of being the shortest in the Volume. We here
translate it entire:--
"By Church-Clothes, it need not be premised that I mean infinitely
more than Cassocks and Surplices; and do not at all mean the mere
haberdasher Sunday Clothes that men go to Church in.

This is an atom: 
Far from it! Church-Clothes are, in our vocabulary, the Forms, the
_Vestures_, under which men have at various periods embodied and
represented for themselves the Religious Principle; that is to say,
invested the Divine Idea of the World with a sensible and practically
active Body, so that it might dwell among them as a living and
life-giving WORD.

This is an atom: 
"These are unspeakably the most important of all the vestures and garnitures
of Human Existence.

This is an atom: 
They are first spun and woven, I may say, by that wonder of wonders,
SOCIETY; for it is still only when 'two or three are gathered
together,' that Religion, spiritually existent, and indeed indestructible,
however latent, in each, first outwardly manifests itself (as with
'cloven tongues of fire'), and seeks to be embodied in a visible Communion
and Church Militant. Mystical, more than magical, is that Communing
of Soul with Soul, both looking heavenward:
here properly Soul first speaks with Soul; for only in looking
heavenward, take it in what sense you may, not in looking earthward,
does what we can call Union, mutual Love, Society, begin to be
possible.

This is an atom: 
How true is that of Novalis: 'It is certain, my Belief gains quite
_infinitely_ the moment I can convince another mind thereof'!

This is an atom: 
Gaze thou in the face of thy Brother, in those eyes where plays the
lambent fire of Kindness, or in those where rages the lurid
conflagration of Anger; feel how thy own so quiet Soul is straightway
involuntarily kindled with the like, and ye blaze and reverberate
on each other, till it is all one limitless confluent flame (of
embracing Love, or of deadly-grappling Hate); and then say what
miraculous virtue goes out of man into man.

This is an atom: 
But if so, through all the thick-plied hulls of our Earthly Life;
how much more when it is of the Divine Life we speak, and inmost
ME is, as it were, brought into contact with inmost ME!

This is an atom: 
"Thus was it that I said, the Church Clothes are first spun and woven
by Society; outward Religion originates by Society, Society becomes
possible by Religion. Nay, perhaps, every conceivable Society, past and
present, may well be figured as properly and wholly a Church, in one or
other of these three predicaments: an audibly preaching and prophesying
Church, which is the best; second, a Church that struggles to preach
and prophesy, but cannot as yet, till its Pentecost come; and third
and worst, a Church gone dumb with old age, or which only mumbles
delirium prior to dissolution.

This is an atom: 
Whoso fancies that by Church is here meant Chapter-houses and Cathedrals,
or by preaching and prophesying, mere speech and chanting, let him,"
says the oracular Professor, "read on, light of heart (_getrosten
Muthes_).

This is an atom: 
"But with regard to your Church proper, and the Church-Clothes specially
recognized as Church-Clothes, I remark, fearlessly enough, that
without such Vestures and sacred Tissues Society has not existed,
and will not exist.

This is an atom: 
For if Government is, so to speak, the outward SKIN of the Body Politic,
holding the whole together and protecting it; and all your
Craft-Guilds, and Associations for Industry, of hand or of head,
are the Fleshly Clothes, the muscular and osseous Tissues (lying
_under_ such SKIN), whereby Society stands and works;--then is
Religion the inmost Pericardial and Nervous Tissue, which ministers
Life and warm Circulation to the whole.

This is an atom: 
Without which Pericardial Tissue the Bones and Muscles (of Industry) were
inert, or animated only by a Galvanic vitality; the SKIN would
become a shrivelled pelt, or fast-rotting rawhide; and Society
itself a dead carcass,--deserving to be buried.

This is an atom: 
Men were no longer Social, but Gregarious; which latter state also
could not continue, but must gradually issue in universal selfish
discord, hatred, savage isolation, and dispersion;--whereby, as we
might continue to say, the very dust and dead body of Society would
have evaporated and become abolished.

This is an atom: 
Such, and so all-important, all-sustaining, are the Church-Clothes to
civilized or even to rational men.

This is an atom: 
"Meanwhile, in our era of the World, those same Church-Clothes have
gone sorrowfully out-at-elbows; nay, far worse, many of them have
become mere hollow Shapes, or Masks, under which no living Figure
or Spirit any longer dwells; but only spiders and unclean beetles,
in horrid accumulation, drive their trade; and the mask still glares
on you with its glass eyes, in ghastly affectation of Life,--some
generation-and-half after Religion has quite withdrawn from it, and
in unnoticed nooks is weaving for herself new Vestures, wherewith
to reappear, and bless us, or our sons or grandsons.

This is an atom: 
As a Priest, or Interpreter of the Holy, is the noblest and highest of
all men, so is a Sham-priest (_Schein-priester_) the falsest and basest;
neither is it doubtful that his Canonicals, were they Popes' Tiaras,
will one day be torn from him, to make bandages for the wounds of
mankind; or even to burn into tinder, for general scientific or culinary
purposes.

This is an atom: 
"All which, as out of place here, falls to be handled in my Second
Volume, _On the Palingenesia, or Newbirth of Society_; which volume,
as treating practically of the Wear, Destruction, and Retexture of
Spiritual Tissues, or Garments, forms, properly speaking, the
Transcendental or ultimate Portion of this my work on _Clothes_, and
is already in a state of forwardness."
And herewith, no farther exposition, note, or commentary being added,
does Teufelsdrockh, and must his Editor now, terminate the singular
chapter on Church-Clothes!

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER III. SYMBOLS.

This is an atom: 
Probably it will elucidate the drift of these foregoing obscure
utterances, if we here insert somewhat of our Professor's speculations
on _Symbols_.

This is an atom: 
To state his whole doctrine, indeed, were beyond our compass: nowhere
is he more mysterious, impalpable, than in this of "Fantasy being
the organ of the Godlike;" and how "Man thereby, though based, to
all seeming, on the small Visible, does nevertheless extend down
into the infinite deeps of the Invisible, of which Invisible, indeed,
his Life is properly the bodying forth."

This is an atom: 
Let us, omitting these high transcendental aspects of the matter,
study to glean (whether from the Paper-bags or the Printed Volume)
what little seems logical and practical, and cunningly arrange it
into such degree of coherence as it will assume.

This is an atom: 
By way of proem, take the following not injudicious remarks:--
"The benignant efficacies of Concealment," cries our Professor, "who shall
speak or sing? SILENCE and SECRECY!

This is an atom: 
Altars might still be raised to them (were this an altar-building
time) for universal worship.

This is an atom: 
Silence is the element in which great things fashion themselves together;
that at length they may emerge, full-formed and majestic, into the
daylight of Life, which they are thenceforth to rule.

This is an atom: 
Not William the Silent only, but all the considerable men I have known,
and the most undiplomatic and unstrategic of these, forbore to babble of
what they were creating and projecting.

This is an atom: 
Nay, in thy own mean perplexities, do thou thyself but _hold thy
tongue for one day_: on the morrow, how much clearer are thy purposes
and duties; what wreck and rubbish have those mute workmen within
thee swept away, when intrusive noises were shut out!

This is an atom: 
Speech is too often not, as the Frenchman defined it, the art of
concealing Thought; but of quite stifling and suspending Thought,
so that there is none to conceal.

This is an atom: 
Speech too is great, but not the greatest. As the Swiss Inscription says:
_Sprechen ist silbern, Schweigen ist golden_ (Speech is silvern,
Silence is golden); or as I might rather express it: Speech is of
Time, Silence is of Eternity.

This is an atom: 
"Bees will not work except in darkness; Thought will not work except
in Silence: neither will Virtue work except in Secrecy.

This is an atom: 
Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth!

This is an atom: 
Neither shalt thou prate even to thy own heart of 'those secrets known
to all.' Is not Shame (_Schaam_) the soil of all Virtue, of all good
manners and good morals?

This is an atom: 
Like other plants, Virtue will not grow unless its root be hidden,
buried from the eye of the sun. Let the sun shine on it, nay do but look
at it privily thyself, the root withers, and no flower will glad
thee.

This is an atom: 
O my Friends, when we view the fair clustering flowers that
overwreathe, for example, the Marriage-bower, and encircle man's
life with the fragrance and hues of Heaven, what hand will not smite
the foul plunderer that grubs them up by the roots, and, with
grinning, grunting satisfaction, shows us the dung they flourish in!

This is an atom: 
Men speak much of the Printing Press with its Newspapers: _du
Himmel_!

This is an atom: 
what are these to Clothes and the Tailor's Goose?

This is an atom: 
"Of kin to the so incalculable influences of Concealment, and connected
with still greater things, is the wondrous agency of _Symbols_.
In a Symbol there is concealment and yet revelation; here therefore,
by Silence and by Speech acting together, comes a double significance.
And if both the Speech be itself high, and the Silence fit and
noble, how expressive will their union be!

This is an atom: 
Thus in many a painted Device, or simple Seal-emblem, the commonest Truth
stands out to us proclaimed with quite new emphasis.

This is an atom: 
"For it is here that Fantasy with her mystic wonderland plays into the
small prose domain of Sense, and becomes incorporated therewith.

This is an atom: 
In the Symbol proper, what we can call a Symbol, there is ever, more
or less distinctly and directly, some embodiment and revelation
of the Infinite; the Infinite is made to blend itself with the
Finite, to stand visible, and as it were, attainable there.

This is an atom: 
By Symbols, accordingly, is man guided and commanded, made happy, made
wretched: He everywhere finds himself encompassed with Symbols,
recognized as such or not recognized: the Universe is but one vast
Symbol of God; nay if thou wilt have it, what is man himself but a
Symbol of God; is not all that he does symbolical; a revelation to
Sense of the mystic god-given force that is in him; a 'Gospel of
Freedom,' which he, the 'Messias of Nature,' preaches, as he can,
by act and word?

This is an atom: 
Not a Hut he builds but is the visible embodiment of a Thought; but
bears visible record of invisible things; but is, in the transcendental
sense, symbolical as well as real."

This is an atom: 
"Man," says the Professor elsewhere, in quite antipodal contrast with
these high-soaring delineations, which we have here cut short on
the verge of the inane, "Man is by birth somewhat of an owl.

This is an atom: 
Perhaps, too, of all the owleries that ever possessed him, the most
owlish, if we consider it, is that of your actually existing
Motive-Millwrights.

This is an atom: 
Fantastic tricks enough man has played, in his time; has fancied himself
to be most things, down even to an animated heap of Glass: but to
fancy himself a dead Iron-Balance for weighing Pains and Pleasures
on, was reserved for this his latter era.

This is an atom: 
There stands he, his Universe one huge Manger, filled with hay and
thistles to be weighed against each other; and looks long-eared
enough.

This is an atom: 
Alas, poor devil!

This is an atom: 
spectres are appointed to haunt him: one age he is hag-ridden, bewitched;
the next, priest-ridden, befooled; in all ages, bedevilled.

This is an atom: 
And now the Genius of Mechanism smothers him worse than any Nightmare
did; till the Soul is nigh choked out of him, and only a kind of
Digestive, Mechanic life remains.

This is an atom: 
In Earth and in Heaven he can see nothing but Mechanism; has fear for
nothing else, hope in nothing else: the world would indeed grind
him to pieces; but cannot he fathom the Doctrine of Motives, and
cunningly compute these, and mechanize them to grind the other way?

This is an atom: 
"Were he not, as has been said, purblinded by enchantment, you had but
to bid him open his eyes and look.

This is an atom: 
In which country, in which time, was it hitherto that man's history,
or the history of any man, went on by calculated or calculable
'Motives'?

This is an atom: 
What make ye of your Christianities, and Chivalries, and Reformations, and
Marseillaise Hymns, and Reigns of Terror? Nay, has not perhaps the
Motive-grinder himself been in _Love_?
Did he never stand so much as a contested Election?

This is an atom: 
Leave him to Time, and the medicating virtue of Nature."
"Yes, Friends," elsewhere observes the Professor, "not our Logical,
Mensurative faculty, but our Imaginative one is King over us; I
might say, Priest and Prophet to lead us heavenward; or Magician
and Wizard to lead us hellward.

This is an atom: 
Nay, even for the basest Sensualist, what is Sense but the implement
of Fantasy; the vessel it drinks out of?

This is an atom: 
Ever in the dullest existence there is a sheen either of Inspiration or
of Madness (thou partly hast it in thy choice, which of the two),
that gleams in from the circumambient Eternity, and colors with its
own hues our little islet of Time.

This is an atom: 
The Understanding is indeed thy window, too clear thou canst not
make it; but Fantasy is thy eye, with its color-giving retina, healthy
or diseased. Have not I myself known five hundred living soldiers
sabred into crows'-meat for a piece of glazed cotton, which they
called their Flag; which, had you sold it at any market-cross, would
not have brought above three groschen? Did not the whole Hungarian
Nation rise, like some tumultuous moon-stirred Atlantic, when Kaiser
Joseph pocketed their Iron Crown; an implement, as was sagaciously
observed, in size and commercial value little differing from a
horse-shoe?

This is an atom: 
It is in and through _Symbols_ that man, consciously or unconsciously,
lives, works, and has his being: those ages, moreover, are accounted
the noblest which can the best recognize symbolical worth, and prize
it the highest. For is not a Symbol ever, to him who has eyes for
it, some dimmer or clearer revelation of the Godlike?

This is an atom: 
"Of Symbols, however, I remark farther, that they have both an extrinsic
and intrinsic value; oftenest the former only. What, for instance,
was in that clouted Shoe, which the Peasants bore aloft with them as
ensign in their _Bauernkrieg_ (Peasants' War)? Or in the Wallet-and-staff
round which the Netherland _Gueux_, glorying in that nickname of Beggars,
heroically rallied and prevailed, though against King Philip
himself?
Intrinsic significance these had none: only extrinsic; as the
accidental Standards of multitudes more or less sacredly uniting together;
in which union itself, as above noted, there is ever something
mystical and borrowing of the Godlike.

This is an atom: 
Under a like category, too, stand, or stood, the stupidest heraldic
Coats-of-arms; military Banners everywhere; and generally all
national or other sectarian Costumes and Customs: they have no
intrinsic, necessary divineness, or even worth; but have acquired
an extrinsic one.

This is an atom: 
Nevertheless through all these there glimmers something of a Divine
Idea; as through military Banners themselves, the Divine Idea of
Duty, of heroic Daring; in some instances of Freedom, of Right.

This is an atom: 
Nay the highest ensign that men ever met and embraced under, the
Cross itself, had no meaning save an accidental extrinsic one.

This is an atom: 
"Another matter it is, however, when your Symbol has intrinsic
meaning, and is of itself _fit_ that men should unite round it. Let but
the Godlike manifest itself to Sense, let but Eternity look, more
or less visibly, through the Time-Figure (_Zeitbild_)! Then is it fit
that men unite there; and worship together before such Symbol; and so
from day to day, and from age to age, superadd to it new divineness.

This is an atom: 
"Of this latter sort are all true Works of Art: in them (if thou
know a Work of Art from a Daub of Artifice) wilt thou discern Eternity
looking through Time; the Godlike rendered visible. Here too may an
extrinsic value gradually superadd itself: thus certain _Iliads_, and the
like, have, in three thousand years, attained quite new significance.
But nobler than all in this kind are the Lives of heroic god-inspired
Men; for what other Work of Art is so divine?

This is an atom: 
As for Blanche, she may stand behind
the baggage and screech.  She is good for nought else, but she'll do
that right well."

This is an atom: 
"For shame, lad!" said Sir Thomas, laughing.

This is an atom: 
"I heard her yesterday, Sir,--the occasion, a spider but half the size
of a pin head."

This is an atom: 
"What place hast thou for me?" inquired Lady Enville, delicately
applying a scented handkerchief to her fastidious hose.

This is an atom: 
"My dear Madam!" said Jack, bowing low, "you shall be the trumpeter sent
to give challenge unto the Spanish commandant.  If he strike not his
colours in hot haste upon sight of you, then is he no gentleman."

This is an atom: 
Lady Enville sat fanning herself in smiling complacency, No flattery
could be too transparent to please her.

This is an atom: 
"I pray your Lordship, is any news come touching Sir Richard Grenville,
and the plantation which he strave to make in the Queen's Highness'
country of Virginia?" asked Sir Thomas.

This is an atom: 
Barbara listened again with interest.  Sir Richard Grenville was a
Devonshire knight, and a kinsman of Sir Arthur Basset.

This is an atom: 
"Ay,--Roanoke, he called it, after the Indian name.  Why, it did well
but for a time, and then went to wrack.  But I do hear that he purposeth
for to go forth yet again, trusting this time to speed better."

This is an atom: 
"What good in making plantations in Virginia?" demanded Jack, loftily.
"A wild waste, undwelt in save by savages, and many weeks' voyage from
this country,--what gentleman would ever go to dwell there?"

This is an atom: 
"May-be," said Lord Strange thoughtfully, "when the husbandmen that
shall go first have made it somewhat less rough, gentlemen may be found
to go and dwell there."

This is an atom: 
"Why, Jack, lad!  This country is not all the world," observed his
father.

This is an atom: 
"'Tis all of it worth anything, Sir," returned insular Jack.

This is an atom: 
"Thy broom sweepeth clean, Jack," responded Lord Strange.  "What, is
nought worth in France, nor in Holland,--let be the Emperor's dominions,
and Spain, and Italy?"

This is an atom: 
"They be all foreigners, my Lord.  And what better are foreigners than
savages?  They be all Papists, to boot."

This is an atom: 
"Not in Almayne, Jack,--nor in Holland."

This is an atom: 
"Well, they speak no English," said prejudiced Jack.

This is an atom: 
"That is a woeful lack," gravely replied Lord Strange.  "Specially when
you do consider that English was the tongue that Noah spake afore the
flood, and the confusion of tongues at Babel."

This is an atom: 
Jack knew just enough to have a dim perception that Lord Strange was
laughing at him.  He got out of the difficulty by turning the
conversation.

This is an atom: 
"Well, thus much say I: let the King of Spain come when he will, and
where, at every point of the coast there shall be an Englishman
awaiting--and we will drive him home thrice faster than he came at the
first."

This is an atom: 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an atom: 
Note 1.  He was fined 10,000 pounds for contempt of court.  What his
real offences were remains doubtful, beyond the fact that he was a
Papist, and had married against the will of the Queen.

This is an atom: 
Note 2.  The state of the gaols at this time, and for long afterwards,
until John Howard effected his reformation of them, was simply horrible.
The Black Assize at Exeter was by no means the only instance of its
land.

This is an atom: 
Note 3.  I stated in _Robin Tremayne_ that I had not been able to
discover the burial-place of Honor Viscountess Lisle.  Since that time,
owing to the kindness of correspondents, personally unknown to me, I
have ascertained that she was probably buried at Atherington, with her
first husband, Sir John Basset.  In that church his brass still
remains--a knight between two ladies--the coats of arms plainly showing
that the latter are Anne Dennis of Oxleigh and Honor Granville of Stow.
But the Register contains no entry of burial previous to 1570.

This is an atom: 
Note 4.  In the custody of the (Popish) Bishop of Southwark is a quarto
volume, containing, under date of Rome, April 28, 1588,--"An admonition
to the nobility and people of England and Ireland, concerning the
present warres made _for the execution of His Holiness' sentence_, by
the highe and mightie King Catholicke of Spaine: by the Cardinal of
England."  [Cardinal Allen.]--(Third Report of Royal Commission of
Historical Manuscripts, page 233).

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER FOUR.

This is an atom: 
THE INVINCIBLE ARMADA.

This is an atom: 
"His power secured thee, when presumptuous Spain Baptised her fleet
Invincible in vain; Her gloomy monarch, doubtful and resigned To every
pang that racks an anxious mind, Asked of the waves that broke upon his
coast, `What tidings?'--and the surge replied,--`All lost!'"

This is an atom: 
_Cowper_.

This is an atom: 
King Philip of Spain was coming at last.  Every Englishman--ay, and
every woman and child in England--knew that now.

This is an atom: 
When Drake returned home from "singeing the Don's whiskers," he told his
royal mistress that he believed the Spaniards would attempt serious
invasion ere long.  But Elizabeth then laughed the idea to scorn.

This is an atom: 
"They are not so ill-advised.  But if they do come"--and Her Majesty
added her favourite oath--"I and my people will send them packing!"

This is an atom: 
The Queen took measures to prepare her subjects accordingly, whether she
thought the invasion likely or not.  All the clergy in the kingdom were
ordered to "manifest unto their congregations the furious purpose of the
Spanish King."  There was abundant tinder ready for this match: for the
commonalty were wider awake to the danger than either Queen or Council.
The danger is equal now, and more insidious--from Rome, though not from
Spain--but alas! the commonalty are sleeping.

This is an atom: 
Lord Henry Seymour was sent off to guard the seas, and to intercept
intercourse between Spain and her Flemish ports.  The Earl of Leicester
was appointed honorary commander-in-chief, with an army of 23,000 foot
and 2352 horse, for the defence of the royal person: Lord Hunsdon, with
11,000 foot more, and 15,000 horse, was sent to keep guard over the
metropolis; and Charles Lord Howard of Effingham, Lord High Admiral of
England, was appointed to conduct the naval defence.

This is an atom: 
It is the popular belief that Lord Howard was a Papist.  He certainly
was a Protestant at a later period of his life; and though it is
doubtful whether positive evidence can be found to show his religious
views at the time of the invasion, yet there is reason to believe that
the popular idea is supported only by tradition.  [See Appendix.]

This is an atom: 
Tilbury, on the Thames, was chosen as the rendezvous for the land
forces.  The Queen removed to Havering, which lay midway between her two
armies.  It was almost, if not quite, the last time that an English
sovereign ever inhabited the old Saxon palace of Havering-atte-Bower.

This is an atom: 
The ground around Tilbury was surveyed, trenches cut, Gravesend
fortified, and (taking pattern from Antwerp) a bridge of boats was laid
across the Thames, to stop the passage of the river.  Calculations were
made as to the amount requisite to meet the Armada, and five thousand
men, with fifteen ships, were demanded from the city of London.  The
Lord Mayor asked two days for consideration, and then requested that the
Queen would accept ten thousand men and thirty ships.  The Dutch came
into the Thames with sixty sail--generous friends, who forgot in
England's hour of need that she had, only sixteen years before, refused
even bread and shelter in her harbours to their "Beggars of the Sea."
Noblemen joined the army and navy as volunteers, and in the ranks there
were no pressed men.  There was one heart in all the land, from Berwick
to the Lizard.

This is an atom: 
Lastly, a prayer was issued, to be used in all churches throughout the
kingdom, every Wednesday and Friday.  But ecclesiastical dignitaries
were not called upon to write it.  The Defender of the Faith herself
drew up the form, in a plain, decided style, which shows that she could
write lucidly when she liked it.  This was Elizabeth's prayer.

This is an atom: 
"We do instantly beseech Thee of Thy gracious goodness to be merciful to
the Church militant here upon earth, and at this time compassed about
with most strong and subtle adversaries.  Oh let Thine enemies know that
Thou hast received England, which they most of all for Thy Gospel's sake
do malign, into Thine own protection.  Set a wall about it, O Lord, and
evermore mightily defend it.  Let it be a comfort to the afflicted, a
help to the oppressed, and a defence to Thy Church and people,
persecuted abroad.  And forasmuch as this cause is new in hand, direct
and go before our armies both by sea and land.  Bless them, and prosper
them, and grant unto them Thine honourable success and victory.  Thou
art our help and shield.  Oh give good and prosperous success to all
those that fight this battle against the enemies of Thy Gospel."
[Strype.]

This is an atom: 
So England was ready.

This is an atom: 
But Philip was ready too.  He also, in his fashion, had been preparing
his subjects for work.  Still maintaining an outward appearance of
friendship with Elizabeth, he quietly spread among his own people copies
of his pedigree, wherein he represented himself as the true heir to the
crown of England, by descent from his ancestresses Philippa and
Katherine of Lancaster: ignoring the facts--that, though the heir
general of Katherine, he was not so of her elder sister Philippa; and
that if he had been, the law which would have made these two sisters
heiresses presumptive had been altered while they were children.  Beyond
this piece of subtlety, Philip allied himself with the Duke of Parma in
Italy, and the Duke of Guise [Note 1] in France; the plot being that the
Duke of Medina Sidonia, Commander-in-chief of the Armada, was to sail
first for Flanders, and take his orders from Parma: Guise was to land in
the west of England: some other leader, with 12,000 men, in Yorkshire:
while Philip himself, under shelter of the Armada, was to effect his
landing in Kent or Essex.  Ireland was looked upon as certain to revolt
and assist.  Parma harangued the troops destined to join the invading
force from Flanders, informing them that the current coin in England was
gold, only the very poorest using silver; the houses were full of money,
plate, jewellery, and wealth in all shapes.

This is an atom: 
It is well to remember that England was no strange, unexplored land, at
least to the higher officers of the Armada.  Philip himself had been
King of England for four years: the courtiers in his suite had lived
there for months together.  Their exclamation on first journeying from
the coast to Winchester, twenty-three years before, had been that "the
poor of this land dwelt in hovels, and fared like princes!"  They had
not forgotten it now.

This is an atom: 
Lord Howard took up his station at Plymouth, whence he purposed to
intercept the Armada as it came; Sir Francis Drake was sent to the west
with sixty-five vessels.  But time passed on, and no Armada came.  The
English grew secure and careless.  Many ships left the fleet, some
making for the Irish coast, some harbouring in Wales.  The Queen
herself, annoyed at the needless cost, sent word to Lord Howard to
disband four of the largest vessels of the royal navy.  The Admiral
disobeyed, and paid the expenses out of his own purse.  England ought to
bless the memory of Charles Howard of Effingham.

This is an atom: 
It was almost a shock when--suddenly, at last--Philip's ultimatum came.
Spain demanded three points from England: and if her demands were not
complied with, there was no resource but war.

This is an atom: 
1.  The Queen must promise to withdraw all aid from the Protestants in
the Netherlands.

This is an atom: 
2.  She must give back the treasure seized, by Drake the year before.

This is an atom: 
3.  She must restore the Roman Catholic religion throughout England, as
it had been before the Reformation.

This is an atom: 
The first and second clauses would have been of little import in
Elizabeth's eye's, except as they implied her yielding to dictation; the
real sting lay in the last.  And the last was the one which Philip would
be most loth to yield.  With a touch of grim humour, His Catholic
Majesty sent his ultimatum in Latin verse.

This is an atom: 
The royal lioness of England rose from her throne to return her answer,
with a fiery Plantagenet flash in her eyes.  She could play at Latin
verse quite as well as Philip; rather better, indeed,--for his question
required some dozen lines, and one was sufficient for her answer.

This is an atom: 
"Ad Graecas, [Note 2] bone Rex, fient mandata kalendas!" was the prompt
reply of England's Elizabeth.

This is an atom: 
Which may be rendered--preserving the fun--

This is an atom: 
"Great King, thy command shall be done right soon,
  On the thirty-first day of the coming June."

This is an atom: 
Some knowledge of the terrible magnitude of Philip's preparations is
necessary, in order to see what it was which England escaped in 1588.
The Armada consisted of 134 ships, and, reckoning soldiers, sailors, and
galley-slaves, carried about 32,000 men.  [The exact figures are much
disputed, hardly two accounts being alike.] The cost of sustenance per
day was thirty thousand ducats.  The cannon and field-pieces were
unnumbered: the halberts were ten thousand, the muskets seven thousand.
Bread, biscuits, and wine, were laid in for six months, with twelve
thousand pipes of fresh water.  The cargo--among many other items--
consisted of whips and knives, for the conversion of the English; and
doubtless Don Martin Alorcon, Vicar-General of the Inquisition, with one
hundred monks and Jesuits in his train may be classed under the same
head.  Heresy was to be destroyed throughout England: Sir Francis Drake
was singled out for special vengeance.  The Queen was to be taken alive,
at all costs: she was to be sent prisoner over the Alps to Rome, there
to make her humble petition to the Pope, barefoot and prostrate, that
England might be re-admitted to communion with the Holy See.  Did Philip
imagine that any amount of humiliation or coercion would have wrung such
words as these from the lips of Elizabeth Tudor?

This is an atom: 
On the 19th of May, the Invincible Armada, as the Spaniards proudly
termed it, sailed from Lisbon for Corufia.

This is an atom: 
The English Fleet lay in the harbour at Plymouth.  The Admiral's ship
was the "Ark Royal;" Drake commanded the "Revenge:" the other principal
vessels were named the "Lion," the "Bear," the "Elizabeth Jonas," the
"Galleon Leicester," and the "Victory."  They lay still in port waiting
for the first north wind, which did not come until the eighth of July.
Then Lord Howard set sail and went southwards for some distance; but the
wind changed to the south, the fleet was composed entirely of sailing
vessels, and the Admiral was afraid to go too far, lest the Armada
should slip past him in the night, between England and her wooden walls.
So he put back to Plymouth.

This is an atom: 
If he had only known the state of affairs, he would not have done so.
He had been almost within sight of the Armada, which was at that moment
broken and scattered, having met with a terrific storm in the Bay of
Biscay.  Eight ships were driven to a distance, three galleys cast away
on the French coast; where the galley-slaves rebelled, headed by a Welsh
prisoner named David Gwyn.  Medina regained Coruna with some difficulty,
gathered his shattered vessels, repaired damages, and put to sea again
on the eleventh of July.  They made haste this time.  Eight days' hard
rowing brought them within sight of England.

This is an atom: 
A blazing sun, and a strong south-west gale, inaugurated the morning of
the nineteenth of July.  The fleet lay peacefully moored in Plymouth
Sound, all unconscious and unprophetic of what the day was to bring
forth: some of the officers engaged in calculating chances of future
battle, some eagerly debating home politics, some idly playing cards or
backgammon.  These last averred that they had nothing to do.  They were
not destined to make that complaint much longer.

This is an atom: 
At one end of the quarter-deck of Drake's ship, the "Revenge," was a
group of three young officers, of whom two at least were not much more
profitably employed than those who were playing cards in the "Ark
Royal."  They were all volunteers, and the eldest of the three was but
two-and-twenty.  One was seated on the deck, leaning back and apparently
dozing; the second stood, less sleepily, but quite as idly, beside him:
the last, with folded arms, was gazing out to sea, yet discerning
nothing, for his thoughts were evidently elsewhere.  The second of the
trio appeared to be in a musical humour, for snatches of different songs
kept coming from his lips.

This is an atom: 
"`We be three poor mariners,
  Newly come fro' th' seas:
  We spend our lives in jeopardy,
  Whilst others live at ease.'"

This is an atom: 
"Be we?" laughed the youth who was seated on the deck, half-opening his
eyes.  "How much of thy life hast spent in jeopardy, Jack Enville?"

This is an atom: 
"How much?  Did not I once fall into the sea from a rock?--and was
well-nigh drowned ere I could be fished out.  More of my life than
thine, Master Robert Basset."

This is an atom: 
In something like the sense of Thekla Tremayne's "Poor Jack!"  I pause
to say, Poor Robert Basset!  He was the eldest son of the deceased Sir
Arthur.  He had inherited the impulsive, generous heart, and the
sensitive, nervous temperament, of his ancestor Lord Lisle, unchecked by
the accompanying good sense and sober judgment which had balanced those
qualities in the latter.  Hot-headed, warm-hearted, liberal to
extravagance, fervent to fanaticism, unable to say No to any whom he
loved, loving and detesting with passionate intensity, constantly
betrayed into rash acts which he regretted bitterly the next hour,
possibly the next minute--this was Robert Basset.  Not the same
character as Jack Enville, but one just as likely to go to wreck
early,--to dash itself wildly on the breakers, and be broken.

This is an atom: 
"Thou art alive enough now," said Basset.  "But how knowest that I never
fell from a rock into the sea?"

This is an atom: 
Jack answered by a graceful flourish of his hands, and a stave of
another song.

This is an atom: 
"`There's never a maid in all this town
  But she knows that malt's come down, -
  Malt's come down,--malt's come down,
  From an old angel to a French crown.'"

This is an atom: 
"I would it were," said Basset, folding his arms beneath his head.  "I
am as dry as a hornblower."

This is an atom: 
"That is with blowing of thine own trumpet," responded Jack.  "I say,
Tremayne!  Give us thy thoughts for a silver penny."

This is an atom: 
"Give me the penny first," answered the meditative officer.

This is an atom: 
"Haven't an obolus," [halfpenny] confessed Jack.

This is an atom: 
"`The cramp is in my purse full sore,
  No money will bide therein--'"

This is an atom: 
"Another time," observed Arthur Tremayne, "chaffer [deal in trade] not
till thou hast wherewith to pay for the goods."

This is an atom: 
"I am a gentleman, not a chapman," [a retail tradesman] said Jack,
superciliously.

This is an atom: 
"Could a man not be both?"

This is an atom: 
"'Tis not possible," returned Jack, with an astonished look.  "How
should a chapman bear coat armour?"

This is an atom: 
"I reckon, though, he had fathers afore him," said Basset, with his eyes
shut.

This is an atom: 
"Nought but common men," said Jack, with sovereign contempt.

This is an atom: 
"And ours were uncommon men--there is all the difference," retorted
Basset.

This is an atom: 
"Yours were, in very deed," said Jack obsequiously.

This is an atom: 
This was, in truth, the entire cause of Jack's desire for Basset's
friendship.  The latter, poor fellow! imagined that he was influenced by
personal regard.

This is an atom: 
"Didst think I had forgot it?" replied Basset, smiling.

This is an atom: 
"Ah! if I had but thy lineage!" answered Jack.

This is an atom: 
"Thine own is good enough, I cast no doubt.  And I dare say Tremayne's
is worth something, if we could but win him to open his mouth thereon."

This is an atom: 
Jack's look was one of complete incredulity.

This is an atom: 
Arthur neither moved nor spoke.

This is an atom: 
"Hold thou thy peace, Jack Enville," said Basset, answering the look,
for Jack had not uttered a word.  "What should a Lancashire lad know of
the Tremaynes of Tremayne?  I know somewhat thereanent.--Are you not of
that line?" he asked, turning his head towards Arthur.

This is an atom: 
"Ay, the last of the line," said the latter quietly.

This is an atom: 
"I thought so much.  Then you must be somewhat akin unto Sir Richard
Grenville of Stow?"

This is an atom: 
"Somewhat--not over near," answered Arthur, modestly.

This is an atom: 
"Forty-seventh cousin," suggested Jack, not over civilly.

This is an atom: 
"And to Courtenay of Powderham,--what?"

This is an atom: 
"Courtenay!" broke in Jack.  "What! he that, but for the attainder,
should be Earl of Devon?"

This is an atom: 
"He," responded Basset, a little mischievously, "that cometh in a right
line from the Kings of France, and (through women) from the Emperors of
Constantinople."

This is an atom: 
"What kin art thou to him?" demanded Jack, surveying his old playmate
from head to foot, with a sensation of respect which he had never felt
for him before.

This is an atom: 
"My father's mother and his mother were sisters, I take it," said
Arthur.

This is an atom: 
"Arthur Tremayne, how cometh it I never heard this afore?"

This is an atom: 
"I cannot tell, Jack: thou didst never set me on recounting of my
pedigree, as I remember."

This is an atom: 
"But wherefore not tell the same?"

This is an atom: 
"What matter?" quietly responded Arthur.

This is an atom: 
"`What matter'--whether I looked on thee as a mere parson's son, with
nought in thine head better than Greek and Latin, or as near kinsman of
one with very purple blood in him,--one that should be well-nigh Premier
Earl of England, but for an attainder?"

This is an atom: 
Arthur passed by the slight offered alike to his father's profession and
to the classics, merely replying with a smile,--"I am glad if it give
thee pleasure to know it."

This is an atom: 
"But tell me, prithee, with such alliance, what on earth caused Master
Tremayne to take to parsonry?"

This is an atom: 
The contempt in which the clergy were held, for more than a hundred
years after this date, was due in all probability to two causes.  The
first was the natural reaction from the overweening reverence anciently
felt for the sacerdotal order: when the _sacerdos_ was found to be but a
presbyter, his charm was gone.  But the second was the disgrace which
had been brought upon their profession at large, by the evil lives of
the old priests.

This is an atom: 
"I believe," said Arthur, gravely, "it was because he accounted the
household service of God higher preferment than the nobility of men."

This is an atom: 
"Yet surely he knew how men would account of him?"

This is an atom: 
"I misdoubt if he cared for that, any more than I do, Jack Enville."

This is an atom: 
"Nor is thy mother any more than a parson's daughter."

This is an atom: 
"My father, and my mother's father," said Arthur, his eyes flashing,
"were all but martyrs; for it was only the death of Queen Mary that
saved either from the martyr's stake.  That is my lineage, Jack
Enville,--higher than Courtenay of Powderham."

This is an atom: 
"Thou must be clean wood, Arthur!" said Jack, laughing.  "Why, there
were poor chapmen and sely [simple] serving-maids among them that were
burnt in Queen Mary's days; weavers, bricklayers, and all manner of
common folk.  There were rare few of any sort."  [Of any consequence.]

This is an atom: 
"They be kings now, whatso they were," answered Arthur.

This is an atom: 
"There was a bishop or twain, Jack, if I mistake not," put in Basset,
yawning; "and a Primate of all England, without I dreamed it."

This is an atom: 
"Go to, Jack!" pursued Arthur.  "I can tell thee of divers craftsmen
that were very common folk--one Peter, a fisherman, and one Paul, a
tent-maker, and an handful belike--whose names shall ring down all the
ages, long after men have forgotten that there ever were Courtenays or
Envilles.  I set the matter on thine own ground to say this."

This is an atom: 
"Stand and deliver, Jack Enville!  That last word hath worsted thee,"
said Basset.

This is an atom: 
"I am not an orator," returned Jack, loftily.  "I am a gentleman."

This is an atom: 
"Well, so am I, as I suppose, but I make not such ado thereof as thou,"
answered Basset.

This is an atom: 
The last word had only just escaped his lips, when Arthur Tremayne
stepped suddenly to the side of the vessel.

This is an atom: 
"The Don ahead?" inquired Basset, with sleepy sarcasm.

This is an atom: 
"I cannot tell what is ahead yet," said Arthur, concentrating his gaze
in an easterly direction.  "But there is somewhat approaching us."

This is an atom: 
"A sea-gull," was the suggestion of Basset, with shut eyes.

This is an atom: 
"Scantly," said Arthur good-humouredly.

This is an atom: 
Half idly, half curiously, jack brought his powers to bear on the
approaching object.  Basset was not sufficiently interested to move.

This is an atom: 
The object ere long revealed itself as a small vessel, rowing in all
haste, and evidently anxious to reach the fleet without losing an hour.
The "Revenge" stood out furthest of all the ships to eastward, and was
therefore likely to receive the little vessel's news before any other.
Almost before she came within speaking distance, at Arthur's request,
Jack hailed her--that young gentleman being in possession of more
stentorian lungs than his friend.

This is an atom: 
The captain, who replied, was gifted with vocal powers of an equally
amazing order.  He announced his vessel as the "Falcon," [Note 3]
himself as Thomas Fleming; and his news--enough to make every ear in the
fleet tingle--that "the Spaniard" had been sighted that morning off the
Lizard.  Arthur darted away that instant in search of Drake: Jack and
Basset (both wide awake now) stayed to hear the details,--the latter
excited, the former sceptical.

This is an atom: 
"'Tis all but deceiving!" sneered the incredulous Jack.  "Thomas
Fleming! why, who wist not that Thomas Fleming is more pirate than
sea-captain, and that the `Falcon' is well enough known for no honest
craft?"

This is an atom: 
"`Fair and soft go far in a day,'" returned Basset.  "What if he be a
pirate?  He is an Englishman.  Even a known liar may speak truth."

This is an atom: 
"As if the like of him should sight the Spaniard!" retorted Jack
magnificently, "when the whole fleet have scoured the seas in vain!"

This is an atom: 
"The whole fleet were not scouring the seas at three of the clock this
morrow!" cried Basset, impatiently.  "Hold thine idle tongue, and leave
us hear the news."  And he shouted with all the power of his
lungs,--"What strength is he of?"

This is an atom: 
"The strength of the very devil!"  Fleming roared back.  "Great wooden
castles, the Lord wot how many, and coming as fast as a bird flieth."

This is an atom: 
"Pish!" said Jack.

This is an atom: 
Basset was on the point of shouting another question, when Sir Francis
Drake's voice came, clear and sonorous, from no great distance.

This is an atom: 
"What time shall the Don be hither?"

This is an atom: 
"By to-morrow breaketh, as like as not," was Fleming's answer.

This is an atom: 
"Now, my lads, we have work afore us," said Sir Francis, addressing his
young friends.  "Lieutenant Enville, see that all hands know at once,--
every man to his post!  Tremayne, you shall have the honour to bear the
news to the Lord Admiral: and Basset, you shall fight by my side.  I
would fain promote you all, an' I have the chance; allgates, I give you
the means to win honour, an' you wot how to use them."

This is an atom: 
All the young men expressed their acknowledgment--Jack rather fulsomely,
Basset and Tremayne in a few quiet words.  It was a decided advantage to
Jack and Arthur to have the chance of distinguishing themselves by "a
fair field and no favour."  But was it any special preferment for the
great-grandson of Edward the Fourth?  What glory would be added to his
name by "honourable mention" in Lord Howard's despatches, or maybe an
additional grade in naval rank?

This is an atom: 
Did Robert Basset fail to see that?

This is an atom: 
By no means.  But he was biding his time.  The chivalrous generosity,
which was one of the legacies of his Plantagenet forefathers, imposed
silence on him for a season.

This is an atom: 
Elizabeth Tudor had shown much kindness to her kinsman, Sir Arthur
Basset, and while Elizabeth lived, no Basset of Umberleigh would lift a
hand against her.  But no such halo surrounded her successor--whoever
that yet doubtful individual might prove to be.  So Robert Basset
waited, and bore his humiliation calmly--all the more calmly for the
very pride of blood that was in him: for no slight, no oppression, no
lack of recognition, could make him other than the heir of the
Plantagenets.  He would be ready when the hour struck.  But meanwhile he
was waiting.

This is an atom: 
Fleming's news had taken everybody by surprise except one person.  But
that one was the Lord High Admiral.

This is an atom: 
Lord Howard quickly gathered his fleet together, and inquired into its
condition.  Many of the ships were poorly victualled; munition ran very
short; not a vessel was to be compared for size with the "great wooden
castles" which Fleming had described.  The wind was south-west, and
blowing hard; the very wind most favourable to the invaders.

This is an atom: 
Sir Edward Hoby, brother-in-law of the Admiral, was sent off to the
Queen with urgent letters, begging that she would send more aid to the
fleet, and put her land forces in immediate readiness, for "the
Spaniard" was coming at last, and as fast as the wind could bring him.

This is an atom: 
Sir Edward reached Tilbury on the very day chosen by Elizabeth to review
her land forces.  He left the fleet making signals of distress; he found
the army in triumphant excitement.

This is an atom: 
The Queen rode in from Havering on a stately charger--tradition says a
white one--bearing a marshal's staff in her hand, and attired in a
costume which was a singular mixture of warrior and woman,--a corslet of
polished steel over an enormous farthingale.  As she came near the
outskirts of her army, she commanded all her retinue to fall back, only
excepting Lord Ormonde, who bore the sword of state before her, and the
solitary page who carried her white-plumed helmet.  Coming forward to
the front of Leicester's tent--the Earl himself leading her horse,
bare-headed--the Queen took up her position, and, with a wave of her
white-gloved hand for silence, she harangued her army.

This is an atom: 
"My loving people,"--thus spoke England's Elizabeth,--"we have been
persuaded, by some that are careful of our safety, to take heed how we
commit ourself to armed multitudes, for fear of treachery.  But I do
assure you, I do not desire to live to distrust my faithful and loving
people.  Let tyrants fear.  I have alway so behaved myself, that under
God I have placed my chiefest strength and safeguard in the loyal hearts
and good-will of my subjects: and therefore I am come amongst you, as
you see, at this time, not for my recreation and disport, but being
resolved in the midst and heat of the battle to live or die amongst you
all,--to lay down, for my God, and for my kingdoms, and for my people,
mine honour and my blood even in the dust.  I know I have the body of a
weak, feeble woman; but I have the heart and stomach of a king, and of a
King of England too; and think foul scorn that Parma, or Spain, or any
prince of Europe, should dare to invade the borders of my realm: to
which, rather than any dishonour should grow by me, I myself will take
up arms,--I myself will be your general, judge, and rewarder of every
one of your virtues in the field.  I know already for your forwardness
ye have deserved rewards and crowns: and we do assure you, on the word
of a prince, they shall, be duly paid you.  For the meantime, my
Lieutenant General [Leicester] shall be in my stead, than whom never
prince commanded a more noble nor worthy subject.  Not doubting but, by
your obedience to my General, by your concord in the camp, and your
valour in the field, we shall shortly have a famous victory over these
enemies of my God, and of my kingdoms, and of my people."

This is an atom: 
We are told that the soldiers responded unanimously--

This is an atom: 
"Is it possible that any Englishman can abandon such a glorious cause,
or refuse to lay down his life in defence of this heroic Princess?"

This is an atom: 
The sentiment may be authentic, but the expression of it is modern.

This is an atom: 
The speech over, Leicester reverently held the gilt stirrup, and
Elizabeth alighted from her white charger, and went into his pavilion to
dinner.

This is an atom: 
Before the repast was over, Sir Edward Hoby arrived from Lord Howard.
He was taken at once to the tent, that the first freshness of his news
might be for the Queen's own ears.  It had taken him three weeks to
reach Tilbury from Plymouth.  Kneeling before the Queen, he reported
that he had been sent in all haste to entreat for "more aid sent to the
sea," for Medina was known to be coming, and that quickly.

This is an atom: 
"Let him come!" was the general cry of the troops outside.

This is an atom: 
"_Buenas horas, Senor_!" said the royal lady within, wishing good speed
to her adversary in his own tongue.

This is an atom: 
And both meant the same thing,--"We are ready."

This is an atom: 
It was England against the world.  She had no ally, except the sixty
Dutch ships.  And except, too, One who was invisible, but whom the winds
and the sea obeyed.

This is an atom: 
The aid required by Lord Howard came: not from Elizabeth, but from
England.  Volunteers poured in from every shire,--men in velvet gowns
and gold chains, men in frieze jackets and leather jerkins.  The
"delicate-handed, dilettante" Earl of Oxford; the "Wizard" Earl of
Northumberland, just come to his title; the eccentric Earl George of
Cumberland; Sir Thomas Cecil, elder son of the Lord High Treasurer
Burleigh,--weak-headed, but true-hearted; Sir Robert Cecil, his younger
brother,--strong-headed and false-hearted; and lastly, a host in
himself, Sir Walter Raleigh, whose fine head and, great heart few of his
contemporaries appreciated at their true value,--and perhaps least of
all the royal lady whom he served.  These men came in one by one.

This is an atom: 
But the leather jerkins flocked in by hundreds; the men who were of no
account, whose names nobody cared to preserve, whose deeds nobody
thought of recording; yet who, after all, were England, and without whom
their betters would have made very poor head against the Armada.  They
came, leaving their farms untilled, their forges cold, their axes and
hammers still.  All that could wait till afterwards.  Just now, England
must be saved.

This is an atom: 
From all the coast around, provisions were sent in, both of food and
munition: here a stand of arms from the squire's armoury, there a batch
of new bread from the yeoman's farm: those who could send but a chicken
or a cabbage did not hold them back; there were some who had nothing to
give but themselves--and that they gave.  Every atom was accepted: they
all counted for something in the little isle's struggle to keep free.

This is an atom: 
It is the little things, after all, of which great things are made.  Not
only the men who lined the decks of the "Ark Royal," but the women
ashore who baked their bread, and the children who gathered wood in the
forest for the ovens, were helping to save England.

This is an atom: 
Even some Recusants--which meant Romanists--came in with offerings of
food, arms, and service: men who, in being Romanists, had not forgotten
that they were Englishmen.

This is an atom: 
About noon on the twentieth of July, the Armada was first sighted from
Plymouth.  She was supposed at first to be making direct, for that town.
But she passed it, and bore on eastward.  It was evident now that she
meant to make for the Channel,--probably meant to use as a basis of
operations, Calais--England's own Calais, for the loss of which her
heart was sore yet.

This is an atom: 
Lord Howard followed as closely as was consistent with policy.  And now
appeared the disadvantage of the immense vessels which formed the bulk
of the Armada.  The English ships, being smaller, were quicker; they
could glide in and out with ease, where the "great wooden castles" found
bare standing-room.  Before the Armada could reach Calais Roads, early
on the 21st of July, Lord Howard was upon her.

This is an atom: 
When she saw her pursuers, she spread forth in a crescent form, in which
she was seven miles in length.  Trumpets were sounded, drums beaten--
everything was done to strike terror into the little English fleet.

This is an atom: 
"_Santiago de Compostella_!" was the cry from the Armada.

This is an atom: 
"God and Saint George for merry England!" came back from the "Ark
Royal."

This is an atom: 
Both navies struggled hard to get to windward.  But the Spanish ships
were too slow and heavy.  The English won the coveted position.  The
"Revenge" was posted as light-bearer, for night was coming on, and the
"Ark Royal," followed by the rest of the fleet, dashed into the midst of
the Armada.

This is an atom: 
Sir Francis Drake made a terrible blunder.  Instead of keeping to the
simple duty allotted to him, he went off after five large vessels, which
he saw standing apart, and gave them chase for some distance.  Finding
them innocent Easterlings, or merchantmen of the Hanse Towns, he ran
hastily back, to discover that in his absence Lord Howard had most
narrowly escaped capture, having mistaken the Spanish light for the
English.

This is an atom: 
"'Tis beyond any living patience!" cried Robert Basset fierily to Arthur
Tremayne.  "Here all we might have hit some good hard blows at the
Spaniard, and to be set to chase a covey of miserable Easterlings!"

This is an atom: 
"'Twas a misfortunate blunder," responded Arthur more quietly.

This is an atom: 
After two hours' hard fighting, the Admiral, finding his vessels too
much scattered, called them together, tacked, and lay at anchor until
morning.  It certainly was enough to disappoint men who were longing for
"good hard blows," when the "Revenge" rejoined the fleet only just in
time to hear the order for retreat.  Fresh reinforcements came in during
the night.  When day broke on the 22nd, Lord Howard divided his fleet
into four squadrons.  He himself commanded the first, Drake the second,
Hawkins the third, and Frobisher the fourth.  The wind was now north.

This is an atom: 
The Armada went slowly forward; and except for the capture of one large
Venetian ship, nothing was done until the 25th.  Then came a calm,
favourable to the Spaniards, who were rowing, while the English trusted
to their sails.  When the Armada came opposite the Isle of Wight, Lord
Howard again gave battle.

This is an atom: 
This time the "Revenge" was engaged, and in the van.  While the battle
went on, none knew who might be falling: but when the fleet was at last
called to anchor--after a terrible encounter--Basset and Tremayne met
and clasped hands in congratulation.

This is an atom: 
"Where is Enville?" asked the former.

This is an atom: 
Arthur had seen nothing of him.  Had he fallen?

This is an atom: 
The day passed on--account was taken of the officers and crew--but
nothing was to be heard of Jack Enville.

This is an atom: 
About half an hour later, Arthur, who had considerably distinguished
himself in the engagement, was resting on deck, looking rather sadly out
to sea, and thinking of Jack, when Basset came up to him, evidently
struggling to suppress laughter.

This is an atom: 
"Prithee, Tremayne, come below with me one minute."

This is an atom: 
Arthur complied, and Basset led him to the little cabin which the three
young officers occupied together.

This is an atom: 
"Behold!" said Basset grandiloquently, with a flourish of his hand
towards the berths.  "Behold, I beseech you, him that hath alone routed
the Spaniard, swept the seas, saved England, and covered him with glory!
He it is whose name shall live in the chronicles of the time!  He shall
have a statue--of gingerbread--in the court of Her Majesty's Palace of
Westminster, and his name shall be set up--wrought in white goose
feathers--on the forefront of Paul's!  Hail to the valiant and
unconquerable Jack Enville, the deliverer of England from Pope and
Spaniard!"

This is an atom: 
To the great astonishment of Arthur, there lay the valiant Jack, rolled
in a blanket, apparently very much at his ease: but when Basset's
peroration was drawing to a close, he unrolled himself, looking rather
red in the face, and returned to ordinary life by standing on the floor
in full uniform.

This is an atom: 
"Hold thy blatant tongue for an ass as thou art!" was his civil reply to
Basset's lyric on his valour.  "If I did meet a wound in the first flush
of the fray, and came down hither to tend the same, what blame lieth
therein?"

This is an atom: 
"Wert thou wounded, Jack?" asked Arthur.

This is an atom: 
"Too modest belike to show it," observed Basset.  "Where is it, trow?
Is thy boot-toe abrased, or hast had five hairs o' thine head carried
away?"

This is an atom: 
"'Tis in my left wrist," said Jack, replying to Arthur, not Basset.

This is an atom: 
"Prithee, allow us to feast our eyes on so glorious a sign of thy
valiantness!" said Basset.

This is an atom: 
Jack was extremely reluctant to show his boasted wound; but being
pressed to do so by both his friends (from different motives) he
exhibited something which looked like a severe scratch from a cat.

This is an atom: 
"Why, 'tis not much!" said Arthur, who could have shown several worse
indications of battle on himself, which he had not thought worth notice.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, is it not?" muttered Jack morosely.  "I can tell thee, 'tis as
sore--"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, now, wound not yet again the great soul of the hero!" put in
Basset with grim irony.  "If he lie abed i' th' day for a wound to his
wrist, what shall he do for a stab to his feelings?  You shall drive him
to drown him in salt water; and that were cruelty unheard-of, for it
should make his eyes smart.  I tell thee what, Jack Enville--there is
_one_ ass aboard the fleet, and his name is neither Arthur Tremayne
nor--saving your presence--Robin Basset.  Farewell!  I go to win a
laurel crown from Sir Francis by bearing news unto him of thy heroical
deeds."

This is an atom: 
And away marched Basset, much to the relief of Jack.

This is an atom: 
The encounter of that day had been fearful.  But when Lord Howard drew
off to recruit himself, the Armada gathered her forces together, went
forward, and cast anchor on the 27th in Calais Roads.

This is an atom: 
Here fresh orders reached her from Parma.  Instead of skirmishing in the
Channel, she was to assume the offensive at once.  Within three days
Medina must land in England.  King Philip appears to have resigned his
original intention of making the attack in person.

This is an atom: 
The Armada prepared for the final struggle.  The young gentlemen on
board meantime amused themselves by shouting sundry derisive songs, one
of which was specially chosen when the "Revenge" was sufficiently near
to be aggrieved by it: and Arthur, who had learned enough Spanish from
his mother to act as translator, rendered the ditty into plain English
prose for the benefit of Jack and Basset.  The former received it with
lofty scorn,--the latter with fiery vaticinations concerning his
intentions when the ships should meet: and looking at the figure-head of
the nearest vessel whence the song was shouted, he singled out "La
Dolorida" for his special vengeance.  A translation of the lyric in
question is appended.  [Note 4.] The speaker, it will be seen, is
supposed to be a young Spanish lady.

This is an atom: 
"My brother Don John
  To England is gone,
  To kill the Drake,
  And the Queen to take,
  And the heretics all to destroy;
  And he has promised
  To bring to me
  A Lutheran boy
  With a chain round his neck:
  And Grandmamma
  From his share shall have
  A Lutheran maid
  To be her slave."

This is an atom: 
The prospect was agreeable.  One thing was plain--that "the Don" had
acquired a wholesome fear of "the Drake."

This is an atom: 
Sunday was the 28th: and on that morning it became evident that Medina
meant mischief.  The seven-mile crescent was slowly, but surely, closing
in round Dover.  The Spaniard was about to land.  Lord Howard called a
council of war: and a hasty resolution was taken.  Eight gunboats were
cleared out; their holds filled with combustible matter; they were set
on fire, and sent into the advancing Armada.  The terror of the
Spaniards was immense.  They fancied it Greek fire, such as had wrought
fearful havoc among them at the siege of Antwerp.  With shrieks of "The
fire of Antwerp!--The fire of Antwerp!"--the Armada fell into disorder,
and the vessels dispersed on all sides in the wildest confusion.  Lord
Howard followed in chase of Medina.

This is an atom: 
Even yet the Armada might have rallied and renewed the attack.  But now
the wind began to blow violently from the south.  The galleys could make
no head against it.  Row as they would, they were hurried northward, the
English giving chase hotly.  The Spanish ships were driven hither and
thither, pursued alike by the winds and the foe.  One of the largest
galleons ran ashore at Calais--from which the spoil taken was fifty
thousand ducats--one at Ostend, several in different parts of Holland.
Don Antonio de Matigues escaped from the one which ran aground at
Calais, and carried back to Philip, like the messengers of Job, the news
that he only had escaped to tell the total loss of the Invincible
Armada.  But the loss was not quite so complete.  Medina was still
driving northward before the gale, with many of his vessels, chased by
the "Ark Royal" and her subordinates.  He tried hard to cast anchor at
Gravelines; but Lord Howard forced him away.  Past Dunquerque ran the
shattered Armada, with her foe in hot pursuit.  There was one danger
left, and until that peril was past, Lord Howard would not turn back.
If Medina had succeeded in landing in Scotland,--which the Admiral fully
expected him to attempt--the numerous Romanists left in that country,
and the "Queensmen," the partisans of the beheaded Queen, would have
received him with open arms.  This would have rendered the young King's
[James the Sixth, of Scotland] tenure of power very uncertain, and might
not improbably have ended in an invasion of the border by a
Scoto-Spanish army.  But Lord Howard did not know that no thought of
victory now animated Medina.  The one faint hope within him was to reach
home.

This is an atom: 
Internal dissensions were now added to the outward troubles of the
Spaniards.  Seven hundred English prisoners banded themselves under
command of Sir William Stanley, and turned upon their gaolers.  The
Armada spread her sails, and let herself drive faster still.
Northwards, ever northwards!  It was the only way left open to Spain.

This is an atom: 
For four days the "Ark Royal" kept chase of the miserable relics of this
once-grand Armada.  When the Orkneys were safely passed, Lord Howard
drew off, leaving scouts to follow Medina, and report where he went.  If
he had gone on for two days longer, he would not have had a charge of
powder left.

This is an atom: 
Five thousand Spaniards had been killed; a much larger number lay
wounded or ill; twelve of the most important ships were lost; provisions
failed them; the fresh water was nearly all spent.  One of the galleons
ran aground at Fair Isle, in the Shetlands, where relics are still kept,
and the dark complexions of the natives show traces of Spanish blood.
The "Florida" was wrecked on the coast of Morven--where her shattered
hulk lies yet.  Medina made his way between the Faroe Isles and Iceland,
fled out to the high seas, and toiled past Ireland home.  The rest of
the fleet tried to reach Cape Clear.  Forty-one were lost off the coast
of Ireland: many driven by the strong west wind into the English
Channel, where they were taken, some by the English, some by the
Rochellois: a few gained Neubourg in Normandy.  Out of 134 ships, above
eighty were total wrecks.

This is an atom: 
So ended the Invincible Armada.

This is an atom: 
England fought well.  But it was not England who was the conqueror,
[Note 5] but the south wind and the west wind of God.

This is an atom: 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an atom: 
Note 1.  This was the same Duke of Guise who took an active part in the
Massacre of Saint Bartholomew.  He was assassinated at Blois, December
23, 1588--less than six months after the invasion of the Armada.

This is an atom: 
Note 2.  The Greeks did not reckon by kalends.  The Romans, who did,
when they meant to refuse a request good-humouredly, said jokingly that
it should be granted "in the Greek kalends."

This is an atom: 
Note 3.  The name of Fleming's vessel does not appear.

This is an atom: 
Note 4.  I am not responsible for this translation, nor have I met with
the original.

This is an atom: 
Note 5.  No one was more thoroughly persuaded of this than Elizabeth
herself.  Thirteen years afterwards, at the opening of her last
Parliament, the Speaker thought proper to remark that England had been
defended from all dangers that had attacked her by "the mighty arm of
our dread and sacred Queen."  An unexpected voice from the throne
rebuked him.  "No, Mr Speaker: by the mighty hand of God."

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER FIVE.

This is an atom: 
THE WRECK OF THE "DOLORIDA."

This is an atom: 
"And therefore unto this poor child of Eve
  The thing forbidden was the one thing wanting,
  Without which all the rest were dust and ashes."

This is an atom: 
"Heardst ever the like of the gale this night, Barbara?" asked Blanche,
as she stood twisting up her hair before the mirror, one morning towards
the close of August.

This is an atom: 
"'Twas a cruel rough night, in sooth," was the answer.  "Yet the wind is
westerly.  God help the poor souls that were on the sea this night!
They must have lacked the same."

This is an atom: 
"'Twas ill for the Spaniard, I reckon," said Blanche lightly.

This is an atom: 
"'Twas ill for life, Mistress Blanche," returned Barbara, gravely.
"There be English on the wild waters, beside Spaniards.  The Lord avert
evil from them!"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, I go not about to pray that ill be avoided from those companions,"
retorted Blanche in scorn.  "They may drown, every man of them, for
aught I care."

This is an atom: 
"They be some woman's childre, every man," was Barbara's reply.

This is an atom: 
"O Blanche!" interposed Clare, reproachfully.  "Do but think of their
childre at home: and the poor mothers that are watching in the villages
of Spain for their lads to come back to them!  How canst thou wish them
hurt?"

This is an atom: 
"How touching a picture!" said Blanche in the same tone.

This is an atom: 
"In very deed, I would not by my good-will do them none ill," responded
Barbara; "I would but pray and endeavour myself that they should do none
ill to me."

This is an atom: 
"How should they do thee ill, an' they were drowned?" laughed Blanche.

This is an atom: 
The girl was not speaking her real sentiments.  She was neither cruel
nor flinty-hearted, but was arguing and opposing, as she often did,
sheerly from a spirit of contradiction, and a desire to astonish her
little world; Blanche's vanity was of the Erostratus character.  While
she longed to be liked and admired, she would have preferred that people
should think her disagreeable, rather than not think of her at all.

This is an atom: 
"But, Blanche," deprecated Clare, who did not enter into this
peculiarity of her sister, "do but fancy, if one of these very men did
seek thy gate, all wet and weary and hungered, and it might be maimed in
the storm, without so much as one penny in his pocket for to buy him
fire and meat--thou wouldst not shut the door in his face?"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, truly, for I would take a stout cudgel and drive him thence."

This is an atom: 
"O Blanche!"

This is an atom: 
"O Clare!" said Blanche mockingly.

This is an atom: 
"I could never do no such a thing," added Clare, in a low tone.

This is an atom: 
"What, thou wouldst lodge and feed him?"

This is an atom: 
"Most surely."

This is an atom: 
"Then shouldst thou harbour the Queen's enemy."

This is an atom: 
"I should harbour mine own enemy," said Clare.  "And thou wist who bade
us, `If thine enemy hunger, feed him.'"

This is an atom: 
"Our Lord said that to His disciples."

This is an atom: 
"And are not we His disciples?"

This is an atom: 
"Gramercy, maiden!  Peter, and John, and Andrew, and the like.  'Twas
never meant for folk in these days?"

This is an atom: 
"Marry La'kin!  What say you, Mistress Blanche?--that God's Word was not
meant for folk now o' days?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh ay,--some portion thereof."

This is an atom: 
"Well-a-day! what will this world come to?  I was used to hear say, in
Queen Mary's days, that the great Council to London were busy undoing
what had been done in King Harry's and King Edward's time: but I ne'er
heard that the Lord had ta'en His Word in pieces, and laid up an handful
thereof as done withal."

This is an atom: 
"Barbara, thou hast the strangest sayings!"

This is an atom: 
"I cry you mercy, Mistress mine,--'tis you that speak strangely."

This is an atom: 
"Come hither, and help me set this edge of pearl.  Prithee, let such
gear a-be.  We be no doctors of the schools, thou nor I."

This is an atom: 
"We have souls to be saved, Mistress Blanche."

This is an atom: 
"Very well: and we have heads to be dressed likewise.  Tell me if this
cap sit well behind; I am but ill pleased withal."

This is an atom: 
Heavy rapid steps came down the corridor, and with a hasty knock, Jennet
put her head in at the door.

This is an atom: 
"Mrs Blanche!  Mrs Clare!  If you 'll none miss th' biggest sight ever
you saw, make haste and busk [dress] you, and come down to hall.
There's th' biggest ship ever were i' these parts drove ashore o' Penny
Bank.  Th' Master, and Dick, and Sim, and Abel 's all gone down to th'
shore, long sin'."

This is an atom: 
"What manner of ship, Jennet?" asked both the girls at once.

This is an atom: 
"I'm none fur learnt i' ships," said Jennet, shaking her head.  "Sim
said 'twere a Spaniard, and Dick said 'twere an Englishman; and Abel
bade 'em both hold their peace for a pair o' gaumless [stupid] noodles."

This is an atom: 
"But what saith my father?" cried excited Blanche, who had forgotten all
about the fit of her cap.

This is an atom: 
"Eh, bless you!--he's no noodle: Why, he said he'd see 't afore he told
anybody what 't were."

This is an atom: 
"Barbara, be quick, dear heart, an' thou lovest me.  Let the cap be;
only set my ruff.--Jennet! can we see it hence?"

This is an atom: 
"You'll see 't off th' end o' th' terrace, right plain afore ye," said
Jennet, and summarily departed.

This is an atom: 
There was no loitering after that.  In a very few minutes the two girls
were dressed, Blanche's ruff being satisfactory in a shorter time than
Barbara could ever remember it before.  Clare stayed for her prayers,
but Blanche dashed off without them, and made her way to the end of the
terrace, where her sister presently joined her.

This is an atom: 
"She is a Spaniard!" cried Blanche, in high excitement.  "Do but look on
her build, Clare.  She is not English-built, as sure as this is Venice
ribbon."

This is an atom: 
Clare disclaimed, with a clear conscience, all acquaintance with
shipbuilding, and declined even to hazard a guess as to the nationality
of the ill-fated vessel.  But Blanche was one of those who must be (or
seem to be; either will do) conversant with every subject under
discussion.  So she chattered on, making as many blunders as assertions,
until at last, just at the close of a particularly absurd mistake, she
heard a loud laugh behind her.

This is an atom: 
"Well done, Blanche!" said her father's voice.  "I will get thee a ship,
my lass.  Thou art as fit to be a sea-captain, and come through a storm
in the Bay of Biscay, as--thy popinjay."  [Parrot.]

This is an atom: 
"O Father, be there men aboard yonder ship?" said Clare, earnestly.

This is an atom: 
"Ay, my lass," he replied, more gravely.  "An hundred and seventy
souls--there were, last night, Clare."

This is an atom: 
"And what?"--Clare's face finished the question.

This is an atom: 
"There be nine come ashore," he added in the same tone.

This is an atom: 
"And the rest, Father?" asked Clare piteously.

This is an atom: 
"Drowned, my lass, every soul, in last night's storm."

This is an atom: 
"O Father, Father!" cried Clare's tender heart.

This is an atom: 
"Good lack!" said Blanche.  "Is she English, Father?"

This is an atom: 
"The Dolorida, of Cales, [Cadiz] my maid."

This is an atom: 
"Spanish!" exclaimed Blanche, her excitement returning.  "And what be
these nine men, Father?"

This is an atom: 
"There be two of them poor galley-slaves; two sailors; and four
soldiers, of the common sort.  No officers; but one young gentleman, of
a good house in Spain, that was come abroad for his diversion, and to
see the sight."

This is an atom: 
"Who is this gentleman, Father?--What manner of man is he?"

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas was a little amused by the eagerness of his daughter's
questions.

This is an atom: 
"His name is Don John de Las Rojas, [a fictitious person] Mistress
Blanche,--of a great house and ancient, as he saith, in Andalusia: and
as to what manner of man,--why, he hath two ears, and two eyes, and one
nose, and I wis not how many teeth--"

This is an atom: 
"Now prithee, Father, mock me not!  Where is her--"

This is an atom: 
"What shouldest say, were I to answer, In a chamber of Enville Court?"

This is an atom: 
"Here, Father?--verily, here?  Shall I see him?"

This is an atom: 
"That hangeth on whether thine eyes be shut or open.  Thou must tarry
till he is at ease."

This is an atom: 
"At ease!--what aileth him?"

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas laughed.  "Dost think coming through a storm at sea as small
matter as coming through a gate on land?  He hath 'scaped rarely well;
there is little ails him save a broken arm, and a dozen or so of hard
bruises; but I reckon a day or twain will pass ere it shall be to his
conveniency to appear in thy royal presence, my Lady Blanche."

This is an atom: 
"But what chamber hath he?--and who is with him?--Do tell me all
thereabout."

This is an atom: 
"Verily, curiosity is great part of Eve's legacy to her daughters.
Well, an' thou must needs know, he is in the blue chamber; and thine
aunt and Jennet be with him; and I have sent Abel to Bispham after the
leech.  [Doctor.] What more, an't like the Lady Blanche?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, what like is he?--and how old?--and is he well-favoured?--and--"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, let me have them by threes at the most.  He is like a young man
with black hair and a right wan face.--How old?  Well, I would guess,
an' he were English, something over twenty years; but being Spanish,
belike he is younger than so.--Well-favoured?  That a man should look
well-favoured, my Lady Blanche, but now come off a shipwreck, and his
arm brake, and after fasting some forty hours,--methinks he should be a
rare goodly one.  Maybe a week's dieting and good rest shall better his
beauty."

This is an atom: 
"Hath he any English?"

This is an atom: 
"But a little, and that somewhat droll: yet enough to make one conceive
his wants.  His father and mother both, he told me, were of the Court
when King Philip dwelt here, and they have learned him some English for
this his journey."

This is an atom: 
"Doth his father live?"

This is an atom: 
"Woe worth the day!  I asked him not.  I knew not your Grace should
desire to wit it."

This is an atom: 
"And his mother?  Hath he sisters?"

This is an atom: 
"Good lack! ask at him when thou seest him.  Alack, poor lad!--his work
is cut out, I see."

This is an atom: 
"But you have not told me what shall come of them."

This is an atom: 
"I told thee not!  I have been answering thy questions thicker than any
blackberries.  My tongue fair acheth; I spake not so much this week
past."

This is an atom: 
"How do you mock me, Father!"

This is an atom: 
"I will be sad as a dumpling, my lass.  I reckon, Mistress, all they
shall be sent up to London unto the Council, without there come command
that the justices shall deal with them."

This is an atom: 
"And what shall be done to them?"

This is an atom: 
"Marry, an' I had my way, they should be well whipped all round, and
packed off to Spain.  Only the galley-slaves, poor lads!--they could not
help themselves."

This is an atom: 
"Here 's the leech come, Master," said Jennet, behind them.

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas hastened back into the house, and the two sisters followed
more slowly.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, behold Aunt Rachel!" said Blanche.  "She will tell us somewhat."

This is an atom: 
Now, only on the previous evening, Rachel had been asserting, in her
strongest and sternest manner, that nothing,--no, nothing on earth!--
should ever make her harbour a Spaniard.  They were one and all "evil
companions;" they were wicked Papists; they were perturbators of the
peace of our Sovereign Lady the Queen; hanging was a luxury beyond their
deserts.  It might therefore have been reasonably expected that Rachel,
when called upon to serve one of these very obnoxious persons, would
scornfully refuse assistance, and retire to her own chamber in the
capacity of an outraged Briton.  But Rachel, when she spoke in this way,
spoke in the abstract, with a want of realisation.  When the
objectionable specimen of the obnoxious mass lifted a pair of suffering
human eyes to her face, the ice thawed in a surprisingly sudden manner
from the surface of her flinty heart, and the set lips relaxed into an
astonishingly pitying expression.

This is an atom: 
Blanche, outwardly decorous, but with her eyes full of mischief, walked
up to Rachel, and desired to know how it fared with the Spanish
gentleman.

This is an atom: 
"Poor lad! he is in woeful case!" answered the representative of the
enraged British Lion.  "What with soul and body, he must have borne
well-nigh the pangs of martyrdom this night.  'Tis enough to make one's
heart bleed but to look on him.  And to hear him moan to himself of his
mother, poor heart! when he thinks him alone--at least thus I take his
words: I would, rather than forty shillings, she were nigh to tend him."

This is an atom: 
From which speech it will be seen that when Rachel did "turn coat," she
turned it inside out entirely.

This is an atom: 
"Good lack, Aunt Rachel! what is he but an evil companion?" demanded
irreverent Blanche, with her usual want of respect for the opinions of
her elders.

This is an atom: 
"If he were the worsest companion on earth, child, yet the lad may lack
his wounds dressed," said Rachel, indignantly.

This is an atom: 
"And a Papist!"

This is an atom: 
"So much the rather should we show him the betterness of our Protestant
faith, by Christian-wise tending of him."

This is an atom: 
"And an enemy!" pursued Blanche, proceeding with the list.

This is an atom: 
"Hold thy peace, maid!  Be we not bidden in God's Word to do good unto
our enemies?"

This is an atom: 
"And a perturbator of the Queen's peace, Aunt Rachel!"

This is an atom: 
"This young lad hath not much perturbed the Queen's peace, I warrant,"
said Rachel, uneasily,--a dim apprehension of her niece's intentions
crossing her mind at last.

This is an atom: 
"Nay, but hanging is far too good for him!" argued Blanche, quoting the
final item.

This is an atom: 
"Thou idle prating hussy!" cried Rachel, turning hastily round to face
her,--vexed, and yet laughing.  "And if I have said such things in mine
heat, what call hast thou to throw them about mine ears?  Go get thee
about thy business."

This is an atom: 
"I have no business, at this present, Aunt Rachel."

This is an atom: 
"Lack-a-daisy! that a cousin [then used in the general sense of
relative] of mine should say such a word!  No business, when a barrelful
of wool waiteth the carding, and there is many a yard of flax, to be
spun, and cordial waters to distil, and a full set of shirts to make for
thy father, and Jack's gown to guard [trim] anew with lace, and thy
mother's new stomacher--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, mercy, Aunt Rachel!" cried lazy Blanche, putting her hands over her
ears.

This is an atom: 
But Mistress Rachel was merciless--towards Blanche.

This is an atom: 
"No business, quotha!" resumed that astonished lady.  "And Margaret's
winter's gown should, have been cut down ere now into a kirtle, and
Lucrece lacketh both a hood and a napron, and thine own partlets have
not yet so much as the first stitch set in them.  No business!  Prithee,
stand out of my way, Madam Idlesse, for I have no time to spend in
twirling of my thumbs.  And when thou find thy partlets rags, burden not
me withal.  No business, by my troth!"

This is an atom: 
Muttering which, Rachel stalked away, while Blanche, instead of fetching
needle and thread, and setting to work on her new ruffs, fled into the
garden, and ensconcing herself at the foot of the ash-tree, gazed up at
the windows of the blue chamber, and erected magnificent castles in the
air.  He admits that though "perhaps in an unusual degree morally courageous,"
he succeeded ill in battle, and would fain have avoided it; a
result, as would appear, owing less to his small personal stature
(for in passionate seasons he was "incredibly nimble"), than to his
"virtuous principles:" "if it was disgraceful to be beaten,"
says he, "it was only a shade less disgraceful to have so much as
fought; thus was I drawn two ways at once, and in this important
element of school-history, the war-element, had little but sorrow."

This is an atom: 
On the whole, that same excellent "Passivity," so notable in Teufelsdrockh's
childhood, is here visibly enough again getting nourishment. "He
wept often; indeed to such a degree that he was nicknamed _Der Weinende_
(the Tearful), which epithet, till towards his thirteenth year, was indeed
not quite unmerited. Only at rare intervals did the young soul burst
forth into fire-eyed rage, and, with a stormfulness (_Ungestum_)
under which the boldest quailed, assert that he too had Rights of
Man, or at least of Mankin."

This is an atom: 
In all which, who does not discern a fine flower-tree and cinnamon-tree
(of genius) nigh choked among pumpkins, reed-grass and ignoble shrubs;
and forced if it would live, to struggle upwards only, and not outwards;
into a _height_ quite sickly, and disproportioned to its
_breadth_?

This is an atom: 
We find, moreover, that his Greek and Latin were "mechanically" taught;
Hebrew scarce even mechanically; much else which they called History,
Cosmography, Philosophy, and so forth, no better than not at all.
So that, except inasmuch as Nature was still busy; and he himself "went
about, as was of old his wont, among the Craftsmen's workshops, there
learning many things;" and farther lighted on some small store
of curious reading, in Hans Wachtel the Cooper's house, where
he lodged,--his time, it would appear, was utterly wasted. Which facts
the Professor has not yet learned to look upon with any contentment.
Indeed, throughout the whole of this Bag _Scorpio_, where we now are,
and often in the following Bag, he shows himself unusually
animated on the matter of Education, and not without some touch of what
we might presume to be anger.

This is an atom: 
"My Teachers," says he, "were hide-bound Pedants, without knowledge of
man's nature, or of boy's; or of aught save their lexicons and quarterly
account-books. Innumerable dead Vocables (no dead Language, for they
themselves knew no Language) they crammed into us, and called it
fostering the growth of mind. How can an inanimate, mechanical
Gerund-grinder, the like of whom will, in a subsequent century,
be manufactured at Nurnberg out of wood and leather, foster the
growth of anything; much more of Mind, which grows, not like a
vegetable (by having its roots littered with etymological compost),
but like a spirit, by mysterious contact of Spirit; Thought kindling
itself at the fire of living Thought?

This is an atom: 
How shall _he_ give kindling, in whose own inward man there is no live
coal, but all is burnt out to a dead grammatical cinder? The Hinterschlag
Professors knew syntax enough; and of the human soul thus much: that
it had a faculty called Memory, and could be acted on through the
muscular integument by appliance of birch-rods.

This is an atom: 
"Alas, so is it everywhere, so will it ever be; till the Hod-man
is discharged, or reduced to hod-bearing; and an Architect is hired,
and on all hands fitly encouraged: till communities and individuals
discover, not without surprise, that fashioning the souls of a generation
by Knowledge can rank on a level with blowing their bodies to pieces by
Gunpowder; that with Generals and Field-marshals for killing, there
should be world-honored Dignitaries, and were it possible, true
God-ordained Priests, for teaching.

This is an atom: 
But as yet, though the Soldier wears openly, and even parades, his
butchering-tool, nowhere, far as I have travelled, did the Schoolmaster
make show of his instructing-tool: nay, were he to walk abroad with
birch girt on thigh, as if he therefrom expected honor, would there
not, among the idler class, perhaps a certain levity be excited?"
In the third year of this Gymnasic period, Father Andreas seems to
have died: the young Scholar, otherwise so maltreated, saw himself
for the first time clad outwardly in sables, and inwardly in quite
inexpressible melancholy.

This is an atom: 
"The dark bottomless Abyss, that lies under our feet, had yawned
open; the pale kingdoms of Death, with all their innumerable silent nations
and generations, stood before him; the inexorable word, NEVER! now first
showed its meaning. My Mother wept, and her sorrow got vent; but in my
heart there lay a whole lake of tears, pent up in silent desolation.
Nevertheless the unworn Spirit is strong; Life is so healthful that
it even finds nourishment in Death: these stern experiences, planted
down by Memory in my Imagination, rose there to a whole cypress-forest,
sad but beautiful; waving, with not unmelodious sighs, in dark luxuriance,
in the hottest sunshine, through long years of youth:--as in manhood
also it does, and will do; for I have now pitched my tent under a
Cypress-tree; the Tomb is now my inexpugnable Fortress, ever close
by the gate of which I look upon the hostile armaments, and pains
and penalties of tyrannous Life placidly enough, and listen to its
loudest threatenings with a still smile.

This is an atom: 
O ye loved ones, that already sleep in the noiseless Bed of Rest, whom
in life I could only weep for and never help; and ye, who wide-scattered
still toil lonely in the monster-bearing Desert, dyeing the flinty
ground with your blood,--yet a little while, and we shall all meet THERE,
and our Mother's bosom will screen us all; and Oppression's harness,
and Sorrow's fire-whip, and all the Gehenna Bailiffs that patrol and
inhabit ever-vexed Time, cannot thenceforth harm us any more!"
Close by which rather beautiful apostrophe, lies a labored Character of
the deceased Andreas Futteral; of his natural ability, his deserts
in life (as Prussian Sergeant); with long historical inquiries into the
genealogy of the Futteral Family, here traced back as far as Henry
the Fowler: the whole of which we pass over, not without astonishment.

This is an atom: 
It only concerns us to add, that now was the time when Mother Gretchen
revealed to her foster-son that he was not at all of this kindred;
or indeed of any kindred, having come into historical existence in
the way already known to us.

This is an atom: 
"Thus was I doubly orphaned," says he; "bereft not only of Possession,
but even of Remembrance.

This is an atom: 
Sorrow and Wonder, here suddenly united, could not but produce
abundant fruit.

This is an atom: 
Such a disclosure, in such a season,
  struck its roots through my
  whole nature: ever till the years
  of mature manhood, it mingled with my whole thoughts, was as the
stem whereon all my day-dreams and night-dreams grew.

This is an atom: 
A certain poetic elevation, yet also a corresponding civic depression,
it naturally imparted: _I was like no other_; in which fixed idea,
leading sometimes to highest, and oftener to frightfullest results, may
there not lie the first spring of tendencies, which in my Life have
become remarkable enough? As in birth, so in action, speculation, and
social position, my fellows are perhaps not numerous."

This is an atom: 
In the Bag _Sagittarius_, as we at length discover, Teufelsdrockh has
become a University man; though how, when, or of what quality, will
nowhere disclose itself with the smallest certainty. Few things, in
the way of confusion and capricious indistinctness, can now surprise
our readers; not even the total want of dates, almost without parallel
in a Biographical work. So enigmatic, so chaotic we have always found,
and must always look to find, these scattered Leaves. In _Sagittarius_,
however, Teufelsdrockh begins to show himself even more than usually
Sibylline: fragments of all sorts: scraps of regular Memoir,
College-Exercises, Programs, Professional Testimoniums, Milkscores,
torn Billets, sometimes to appearance of an amatory cast; all blown
together as if by merest chance, henceforth bewilder the sane
Historian.

This is an atom: 
To combine any picture of these University, and the subsequent,
years; much more, to decipher therein any illustrative primordial
elements of the Clothes-Philosophy, becomes such a problem as the
reader may imagine.

This is an atom: 
So much we can see; darkly, as through the foliage of some wavering
thicket: a youth of no common endowment, who has passed happily through
Childhood, less happily yet still vigorously through Boyhood,
now at length perfect in "dead vocables," and set down, as he hopes,
by the living Fountain, there to superadd Ideas and Capabilities. From
such Fountain he draws, diligently, thirstily, yet never or seldom
with his whole heart, for the water nowise suits his palate; discouragements,
entanglements, aberrations are discoverable or supposable. Nor perhaps
are even pecuniary distresses wanting; for "the good Gretchen, who
in spite of advices from not disinterested relatives has sent him hither,
must after a time withdraw her willing but too feeble hand." Nevertheless
in an atmosphere of Poverty and manifold Chagrin, the Humor of
that young Soul, what character is in him, first decisively reveals
itself; and, like strong sunshine in weeping skies, gives out variety
of colors, some of which are prismatic.

This is an atom: 
Thus, with the aid of Time and of what Time brings, has the stripling
Diogenes Teufelsdrockh waxed into manly stature; and into so questionable
an aspect, that we ask with new eagerness, How he specially came
by it, and regret anew that there is no more explicit answer.

This is an atom: 
Certain of the intelligible and partially significant fragments, which
are few in number, shall be extracted from that Limbo of a Paper-bag,
and presented with the usual preparation.

This is an atom: 
As if, in the Bag _Scorpio_, Teufelsdrockh had not already expectorated
his antipedagogic spleen; as if, from the name _Sagittarius_, he had
thought himself called upon to shoot arrows, we here again fall in
with such matter as this: "The University where I was educated still
stands vivid enough in my remembrance, and I know its name well; which
name, however, I, from tenderness to existing interests and persons,
shall in nowise divulge. It is my painful duty to say that, out of England
and Spain, ours was the worst of all hitherto discovered
Universities.

This is an atom: 
This is indeed a time when right Education is, as nearly as may be,
impossible: however, in degrees of wrongness there is no limit:
nay, I can conceive a worse system than that of the Nameless itself;
as poisoned victual may be worse than absolute hunger.

This is an atom: 
"It is written, When the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch: wherefore, in such circumstances, may it not sometimes be safer,
if both leader and led simply--sit still? Had you, anywhere in Crim
Tartary, walled in a square enclosure; furnished it with a small,
ill-chosen Library; and then turned loose into it eleven hundred Christian
striplings, to tumble about as they listed, from three to seven years:
certain persons, under the title of Professors, being stationed at the
gates, to declare aloud that it was a University, and exact considerable
admission-fees,--you had, not indeed in mechanical structure, yet in
spirit and result, some imperfect resemblance of our High Seminary. I
say, imperfect; for if our mechanical structure was quite other, so
neither was our result altogether the same: unhappily, we were not in
Crim Tartary, but in a corrupt European city, full of smoke and
sin; moreover, in the middle of a Public, which, without far costlier
apparatus than that of the Square Enclosure, and Declaration aloud,
you could not be sure of gulling.

This is an atom: 
"Gullible, however, by fit apparatus, all Publics are; and gulled, with
the most surprising profit. Towards anything like a _Statistics of
Imposture_, indeed, little as yet has been done: with a strange
indifference, our Economists, nigh buried under Tables for minor
Branches of Industry, have altogether overlooked the grand
all-overtopping Hypocrisy Branch; as if our whole arts of Puffery,
of Quackery, Priestcraft, Kingcraft, and the innumerable other
crafts and mysteries of that genus, had not ranked in Productive
Industry at all!

This is an atom: 
Can any one, for example, so much as say, What moneys, in Literature and
Shoeblacking, are realized by actual Instruction and actual jet
Polish; what by fictitious-persuasive Proclamation of such; specifying,
in distinct items, the distributions, circulations, disbursements,
incomings of said moneys, with the smallest approach to accuracy?

This is an atom: 
But to ask, How far, in all the several infinitely complected departments
of social business, in government, education, in manual, commercial,
intellectual fabrication of every sort, man's Want is supplied by true
Ware; how far by the mere Appearance of true Ware:--in other words, To
what extent, by what methods, with what effects, in various times
and countries, Deception takes the place of wages of Performance:
here truly is an Inquiry big with results for the future time, but
to which hitherto only the vaguest answer can be given.

This is an atom: 
If for the present, in our Europe, we estimate the ratio of Ware to
Appearance of Ware so high even as at One to a Hundred (which, considering
the Wages of a Pope, Russian Autocrat, or English Game-Preserver,
is probably not far from the mark),--what almost prodigious saving
may there not be anticipated, as the _Statistics of Imposture_
advances, and so the manufacturing of Shams (that of Realities
rising into clearer and clearer distinction therefrom) gradually
declines, and at length becomes all but wholly unnecessary!

This is an atom: 
"This for the coming golden ages. What I had to remark, for the present
brazen one, is, that in several provinces, as in Education, Polity,
Religion, where so much is wanted and indispensable, and so little
can as yet be furnished, probably Imposture is of sanative, anodyne
nature, and man's Gullibility not his worst blessing.

This is an atom: 
Suppose your sinews of war quite broken; I mean your military chest
insolvent, forage all but exhausted; and that the whole army
is about to mutiny, disband, and cut your and each other's
throat,--then were it not well could you, as if by miracle, pay
them in any sort of fairy-money, feed them on coagulated water, or
mere imagination of meat; whereby, till the real supply came up,
they might be kept together and quiet?

This is an atom: 
Such perhaps was the aim of Nature, who does nothing without aim, in
furnishing her favorite, Man, with this his so omnipotent or rather
omnipatient Talent of being Gulled.

This is an atom: 
"How beautifully it works, with a little mechanism; nay, almost makes
mechanism for itself! These Professors in the Nameless lived with ease,
with safety, by a mere Reputation, constructed in past times, and then
too with no great effort, by quite another class of persons.

This is an atom: 
Which Reputation, like a strong brisk-going undershot wheel, sunk into
the general current, bade fair, with only a little annual re-painting on
their part, to hold long together, and of its own accord assiduously
grind for them.

This is an atom: 
Happy that it was so, for the Millers!

This is an atom: 
They themselves needed not to work; their attempts at working, at
what they called Educating, now when I look back on it, fill me
with a certain mute admiration.

This is an atom: 
"Besides all this, we boasted ourselves a Rational University; in
the highest degree hostile to Mysticism; thus was the young vacant
mind furnished with much talk about Progress of the Species, Dark
Ages, Prejudice, and the like; so that all were quickly enough blown
out into a state of windy argumentativeness; whereby the better
sort had soon to end in sick, impotent Scepticism; the worser sort
explode (_crepiren_) in finished Self-conceit, and to all spiritual
intents become dead.

This is an atom: 
--But this too is portion of mankind's lot.

This is an atom: 
If our era is the Era of Unbelief, why murmur under it; is there not a
better coming, nay come? As in long-drawn systole and long-drawn diastole,
must the period of Faith alternate with the period of Denial; must
the vernal growth, the summer luxuriance of all Opinions, Spiritual
Representations and Creations, be followed by, and again follow, the
autumnal decay, the winter dissolution.

This is an atom: 
For man lives in Time, has his whole earthly being, endeavor and destiny
shaped for him by Time: only in the transitory Time-Symbol is
the ever-motionless Eternity we stand on made manifest.
And yet, in such winter-seasons of Denial, it is for the nobler-minded
perhaps a comparative misery to have been born, and to be awake and work;
and for the duller a felicity, if, like hibernating animals,
safe-lodged in some Salamanca University or Sybaris City, or other
superstitious or voluptuous Castle of Indolence, they can slumber through,
in stupid dreams, and only awaken when the loud-roaring hailstorms
have all alone their work, and to our prayers and martyrdoms the
new Spring has been vouchsafed."

This is an atom: 
That in the environment, here mysteriously enough shadowed forth,
Teufelsdrockh must have felt ill at ease, cannot be doubtful. "The hungry
young," he says, "looked up to their spiritual Nurses; and, for food,
were bidden eat the east-wind. What vain jargon of controversial
Metaphysic, Etymology, and mechanical Manipulation falsely named
Science, was current there, I indeed learned, better perhaps than
the most.

This is an atom: 
Among eleven hundred Christian youths, there will not be wanting some
eleven eager to learn. By collision with such, a certain warmth, a certain
polish was communicated; by instinct and happy accident, I took less to
rioting (_renommiren_), than to thinking and reading, which latter also
I was free to do.

This is an atom: 
Nay from the chaos of that Library, I succeeded in fishing up more books
perhaps than had been known to the very keepers thereof. The
foundation of a Literary Life was hereby laid:
I learned, on my own strength, to read fluently in almost all cultivated
languages, on almost all subjects and sciences; farther, as man is
ever the prime object to man, already it was my favorite employment to
read character in speculation, and from the Writing to construe the
Writer.
A certain groundplan of Human Nature and Life began to fashion
itself in me; wondrous enough, now when I look back on it; for my
whole Universe, physical and spiritual, was as yet a Machine!

This is an atom: 
However, such a conscious, recognized groundplan, the truest I had, _was_
beginning to be there, and by additional experiments might be corrected
and indefinitely extended."

This is an atom: 
Thus from poverty does the strong educe nobler wealth; thus in the
destitution of the wild desert does our young Ishmael acquire for himself
the highest of all possessions, that of Self-help. Nevertheless a desert
this was, waste, and howling with savage monsters.

This is an atom: 
Teufelsdrockh gives us long details of his "fever-paroxysms of
Doubt;" his Inquiries concerning Miracles, and the Evidences of religious
Faith; and how "in the silent night-watches, still darker in his
heart than over sky and earth, he has cast himself before the
All-seeing, and with audible prayers cried vehemently for Light,
for deliverance from Death and the Grave.

This is an atom: 
Not till after long years, and unspeakable agonies, did the believing
heart surrender; sink into spell-bound sleep, under the nightmare,
Unbelief; and, in this hag-ridden dream, mistake God's fair living world
for a pallid, vacant Hades and extinct Pandemonium. But through such
Purgatory pain," continues he, "it is appointed us to pass; first must
the dead Letter of Religion own itself dead, and drop piecemeal into dust,
if the living Spirit of Religion, freed from this its charnel-house,
is to arise on us, new-born of Heaven, and with new healing under
its wings."

This is an atom: 
To which Purgatory pains, seemingly severe enough, if we add a liberal
measure of Earthly distresses, want of practical guidance, want
of sympathy, want of money, want of hope; and all this in the fervid
season of youth, so exaggerated in imagining, so boundless in
desires, yet here so poor in means,--do we not see a strong incipient
spirit oppressed and overloaded from without and from within; the
fire of genius struggling up among fuel-wood of the greenest, and
as yet with more of bitter vapor than of clear flame?

This is an atom: 
There was strong cause for suspicion
that twelve years before, Robert Earl of Leicester had given a lesson in
poisoning to Lettice Countess of Essex: and now the same Lettice,
Countess of Leicester, had not forgotten her lesson.  Leicester was
tired of her; perhaps, too, he was a little afraid of what she knew.
The deft and practised poisoner administered a dose to his wife.  But
Lettice survived, and poisoned him in return.  And so the last of the
Dudleys passed to his awful account.

This is an atom: 
His death made no difference in the public rejoicing for the defeat of
the Armada.  Two days afterwards, the Spanish banners were exhibited
from Paul's Cross, and the next morning were hung on London Bridge.  The
nineteenth of November was a holiday throughout the kingdom.  On Sunday
the 24th, the Queen made her famous thanksgiving progress to Saint
Paul's, seated in a chariot built in the form of a throne, with four
pillars, and a crowned canopy overhead.  The Privy Council and the House
of Lords attended her.  Bishop Pierce of Salisbury preached the sermon,
from the very appropriate text, afterwards engraved on the memorial
medals,--"He blew with His wind, and they were scattered."

This is an atom: 
All this time no word came to decide the fate of Don Juan.  It was not
expected now before spring.  A winter journey from Lancashire to London
was then a very serious matter.

This is an atom: 
"So you count it not ill to attend our Protestant churches, Master?"
asked Blanche of Don Juan, as she sat in the window-seat, needlework in
hand.  It was a silk purse, not a kettle-holder, this time.

This is an atom: 
"How could I think aught ill, Dona Blanca, which I see your Grace do?"
was the courtly reply of Don Juan.

This is an atom: 
"But what should your confessor say, did he hear thereof?" asked
Blanche, provokingly.

This is an atom: 
"Is a confessor a monster in your eyes, fair lady?" said Don Juan, with
that smile which Blanche held in deep though secret admiration.

This is an atom: 
"I thought they were rarely severe," she said, bending her eyes on her
work.

This is an atom: 
"Ah, Senora, our faith differs from yours much less than you think.
What is a confessor, but a priest--a minister?  The Senor Tremayne is a
confessor, when one of his people shall wish his advice.  Where lieth
the difference?"

This is an atom: 
Blanche was too ignorant to know where it lay.

This is an atom: 
"I accounted there to be mighty difference," she said, hesitatingly.

This is an atom: 
"_Valgame los santos_!  [The saints defend me!]--but a shade or two of
colour.  Hold we not the same creeds as you?  Your Book of Common
Prayer--what is it but the translation of ours?  We worship the same
God; we honour the same persons, as you.  Where, then, is the
difference?  Our priests wed not; yours may.  We receive the Holy
Eucharist in one kind; you, in both.  We are absolved in private, and
make confession thus; you, in public.  Be these such mighty
differences?"

This is an atom: 
If Don Juan had thrown a little less dust in her eyes, perhaps Blanche
might have had sense enough to ask him where the Church of Rome had
found her authority for her half of these differences, since it
certainly was not in Holy Scripture: and also, whether that communion
held such men as Cranmer, Latimer, Calvin, and Luther, in very high
esteem?  But the dust was much too thick to allow any stronger reply
from Blanche than a feeble inquiry whether these really were all the
points of difference.

This is an atom: 
"What other matter offendeth your Grace?  Doubtless I can expound the
same."

This is an atom: 
"Why, I have heard," said Blanche faintly, selecting one of the smaller
charges first, "that the Papists do hold Mary, the blessed Virgin, to
have been without sin."

This is an atom: 
"Some Catholics have that fantasy," replied Don Juan lightly.  "It is
only a few.  The Church binds it not on the conscience of any.  You take
it--you leave it--as you will."

This is an atom: 
"Likewise you hold obedience due to the Bishop of Rome, instead of only
unto your own Prince, as with us," objected Blanche, growing a shade
bolder.

This is an atom: 
"That, again, is but in matters ecclesiastical.  In secular matters, I
do assure your Grace, the Pope interfereth not."

This is an atom: 
Blanche, who had no answers to these subtle explainings away of the
facts, felt as if all her outworks were being taken, one by one.

This is an atom: 
"Yet," she said, bringing her artillery to bear on a new point, "you
have images in your churches, Don John, and do worship unto them?"

This is an atom: 
The word worship has changed its meaning since the days of Queen
Elizabeth.  To do worship, and to do honour, were then interchangeable
terms.

This is an atom: 
Don Juan smiled.  "Have you no pictures in your books, Dona Blanca?
These images are but as pictures for the teaching of the vulgar, that
cannot read.  How else should we learn them?  If some of the ignorant
make blunder, and bestow to these images better honour than the Church
did mean them, the mistake is theirs.  No man really doth worship unto
these, only the vulgar."

This is an atom: 
"But do not you pray unto the saints?"

This is an atom: 
"We entreat the saints to pray for us; that is all."

This is an atom: 
"Then, in the Lord's Supper--the mass, you call it,"--said Blanche,
bringing up at last her strongest battering-ram, "you do hold, as I have
been taught, Don John, that the bread and wine be changed into the very
self body and blood of our Saviour Christ, that it is no more bread and
wine at all.  Now how can you believe a matter so plainly confuted by
your very senses?"

This is an atom: 
"Ah, if I had but your learning and wisdom, Senora!" sighed Don Juan,
apparently from the bottom of his heart.

This is an atom: 
Blanche felt flattered; but she was not thrown off the scent, as her
admirer intended her to be.  She still looked up for the answer; and Don
Juan saw that he must give it.

This is an atom: 
"Sweetest lady!  I am no doctor of the schools, nor have I studied for
the priesthood, that I should be able to expound all matters unto one of
your Grace's marvellous judgment and learning.  Yet, not to leave so
fair a questioner without answer--suffer that I ask, your gracious leave
accorded--did not our Lord say thus unto the holy Apostles,--`_Hoc est
corpus mens_,' to wit, `This is My Body?'"

This is an atom: 
Blanche assented.

This is an atom: 
"In what manner, then, was it thus?"

This is an atom: 
"Only as a memorial or representation thereof, we do hold, Don John."

This is an atom: 
"Good: as the child doth present [represent] the father, being of the
like substance, no less than appearance,--as saith the blessed Saint
Augustine, and also the blessed Jeronymo, and others of the holy Fathers
of the Church, right from the time of our Lord and His Apostles."

This is an atom: 
Don Juan had never read a line of the works of Jerome or Augustine.
Fortunately for him, neither had Blanche,--a chance on which he safely
calculated.  Blanche was completely puzzled.  She sat looking out of the
window, and thinking with little power, and to small purpose.  She had
not an idea when Augustine lived, nor whether he read the service in his
own tongue in a surplice, or celebrated the Latin mass in full
pontificals.  And if it were true that all the Fathers, down from the
Apostles, had held the Roman view--for poor ignorant Blanche had not the
least idea whether it were true or false--it was a very awkward thing.
Don Juan stood and watched her face for an instant.  His diplomatic
instinct told him that the subject had better be dropped.  All that was
needed to effect this end was a few well-turned compliments, which his
ingenuity readily suggested.  In five minutes more the theological
discussion was forgotten, at least by Blanche, as Don Juan was assuring
her that in all Andalusia there were not eyes comparable to hers.

This is an atom: 
Mr Tremayne and Arthur came in to supper that evening.  The former
quietly watched the state of affairs without appearing to notice
anything.  He saw that Don Juan, who sat by Lucrece, paid her the most
courteous attention; that Lucrece received it with a thinly-veiled air
of triumph; that Blanche's eyes constantly followed, the young Spaniard:
and he came to the conclusion that the affair was more complicated than
he had originally supposed.

This is an atom: 
He waited, however, till Arthur and Lysken were both away, until he said
anything at home.  When those young persons were safely despatched to
bed, Mr and Mrs Tremayne and Mrs Rose drew together before the fire,
and discussed the state of affairs at Enville Court.

This is an atom: 
"Now, what thinkest, Robin?" inquired Mrs Rose.  "Is Blanche, _la
pauvrette_! as fully taken with Don Juan as Barbara did suppose?"

This is an atom: 
"I am afeared, fully."

This is an atom: 
"And Don Juan?"

This is an atom: 
"If I mistake not, is likewise taken with Blanche: but I doubt somewhat
if he be therein as wholehearted as she."

This is an atom: 
"And what say the elders?" asked Mrs Tremayne.

This is an atom: 
"Look on with _eyes_ which see nought.  But, nathless, there be one pair
of eyes that see; and Blanche's path is not like to run o'er smooth."

This is an atom: 
"What, Mistress Rachel?"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, she is blind as the rest.  I mean Lucrece."

This is an atom: 
"Lucrece!  Thinkest she will ope the eyes of the other?"

This is an atom: 
"I think she casteth about to turn Don Juan's her way."

This is an atom: 
"Alack, poor Blanche!" said Mrs Tremayne.  "Howso the matter shall go,
mefeareth she shall not 'scape suffering."

This is an atom: 
"She is no match for Lucrece," observed Mrs Rose.

This is an atom: 
"Truth: but I am in no wise assured Don Juan is not," answered Mr
Tremayne with a slightly amused look.  "As for Blanche, she is like to
suffer; and I had well-nigh added, she demeriteth the same: but it will
do her good, Thekla.  At the least, if the Lord bless it unto her--be
assured I meant not to leave out that."

This is an atom: 
"The furnace purifieth the gold," said Mrs Tremayne sadly: "yet the
heat is none the less fierce for that, Robin."

This is an atom: 
"Dear heart, whether wouldst thou miss the suffering rather, and the
purifying, or take both together?"

This is an atom: 
"It is soon over, Thekla," said her mother, quietly.

This is an atom: 
During the fierce heat of the Marian persecution, those words had once
been said to Marguerite Rose.  She had failed to realise them then.  The
lesson was learned now--thirty-five years later.

This is an atom: 
"Soon over, to look back, dear Mother," replied Mrs Tremayne.  "Yet it
never seems short to them that be in the furnace."

This is an atom: 
Mrs Rose turned rather suddenly to her son-in-law.

This is an atom: 
"Robin, tell me, if thou couldst have seen thy life laid out before thee
on a map, and it had been put to thy choice to bear the Little Ease, or
to leave go,--tell me what thou hadst chosen?"

This is an atom: 
For Mr Tremayne had spent several months in that horrible funnel-shaped
prison, aptly termed Little Ease, and had but just escaped from it with
life.  He paused a moment, and his face grew very thoughtful.

This is an atom: 
"I think, Mother," he said at length, "that I had chosen to go through
with it.  I learned lessons in Little Ease that, if I had lacked now, I
had been sorely wanting to my people; and--speaking as a man--that
perchance I could have learned nowhere else."

This is an atom: 
"Childre," responded the aged mother, "it seemeth me, that of all matter
we have need to learn, the last and hardest is to give God leave to
choose for us.  At least, thus it hath been with me; it may be I mistake
to say it is for all.  Yet I am sure he is the happy man that learneth
it soon.  It hath taken me well-nigh eighty years.  Thou art better,
Robin, to have learned it in fifty."

This is an atom: 
"I count, Mother, we learn not all lessons in the same order," said the
Rector, smiling, "though there be many lessons we must all learn.  'Tis
not like to be my last,--without I should die to-morrow--if I have
learned it thoroughly now.  And 'tis easier to leave in God's hands,
some choices than other."

This is an atom: 
Mrs Rose did not ask of what he was thinking, but she could guess
pretty well.  It would be harder to lose his Thekla now, than if he had
come out of Little Ease and had found her dead: harder to lose Arthur in
his early manhood, than to have seen him coffined with his baby brother
and sisters, years ago.  Mrs Tremayne drew a long sigh, as if she had
guessed it too.

This is an atom: 
"It would be easier to leave all things to God's choice," she said, "if
only we dwelt nearer God."

This is an atom: 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an atom: 
Note 1.  "Vuesa merced," the epithet of ordinary courtesy, is literally
"Your Grace."

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER SEVEN.

This is an atom: 
A SPOKE IN THE WHEEL.

This is an atom: 
"All the foolish work
  Of fancy, and the bitter close of all."

This is an atom: 
_Tennyson_.

This is an atom: 
A few weeks after that conversation, Lucrece Enville sat alone in the
bedroom which she shared with her sister Margaret.  She was not shedding
tears--it was not her way to weep: but her mortification was bitter
enough for any amount of weeping.

This is an atom: 
Lucrece was as selfish as her step-mother, or rather a shade more so.
Lady Enville's selfishness was pure love of ease; there was no
deliberate malice in it.  Any person who stood in her way might be
ruthlessly swept out of it; but those who did not interfere with her
pleasure, were free to pursue their own.

This is an atom: 
The selfishness of Lucrece lay deeper.  She not only sought her own
enjoyment and aggrandisement; but she could not bear to see anything--
even if she did not want it--in the possession of some one else.  That
was sufficient to make Lucrece long for it and plot to acquire it,
though she had no liking for the article in itself, and would not know
what to do with it when she got it.

This is an atom: 
But in this particular instance she had wanted the article: and she had
missed it.  True, the value which she set upon it was rather for its
adjuncts than for itself; but whatever its value, one thought was
uppermost, and was bitterest--she had missed it.

This is an atom: 
The article was Don Juan.  His charm was twofold: first, he would one
day be a rich man and a noble; and secondly, Blanche was in possession.
Lucrece tried her utmost efforts to detach him from her sister, and to
attach him to herself.  And Don Juan proved himself to be her match,
both in perseverance and in strategy.

This is an atom: 
Blanche had not the faintest suspicion that anything of the sort had
been going on.  Don Juan himself had very quickly perceived the
counterplot, and had found it a most amusing episode in the little drama
with which he was beguiling the time during his forced stay in England.

This is an atom: 
But nobody else saw either plot or counterplot, until one morning, when
a low soft voice arrested Sir Thomas as he was passing out of the garden
door.

This is an atom: 
"Father, may I have a minute's speech of you?"

This is an atom: 
"Ay so, Lucrece?  I was about to take a turn or twain in the garden;
come with me, lass."

This is an atom: 
"So better, Father, for that I must say lacketh no other ears."

This is an atom: 
"What now?" demanded Sir Thomas, laughing.  "Wouldst have money for a
new chain, or leave to go to a merry-making?  Thou art welcome to
either, my lass."

This is an atom: 
"I thank you, Father," said Lucrece gravely, as they paced slowly down
one of the straight, trim garden walks: "but not so,--my words are of
sadder import."

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas turned and looked at her.  Never until this moment, in all
her four-and-twenty years, had his second daughter given him an iota of
her confidence.

This is an atom: 
"Nay, what now?" he said, in a perplexed tone.

This is an atom: 
"I pray you, Father, be not wroth with me, for my reasons be strong, if
I am so bold as to ask at you if you have yet received any order from
the Queen's Majesty's Council, touching the disposing of Don John?"

This is an atom: 
"Art thou turning states-woman, my lass?  Nay, not I--not so much as a
line."

This is an atom: 
"Might I take on me, saving your presence, Father, to say so much as--I
would you would yet again desire the same?"

This is an atom: 
"Why, my lass, hath Don John offenced thee, that thou wouldst fain be
rid of him?  I would like him to tarry a while longer.  What aileth
thee?"

This is an atom: 
"Would you like him to marry Blanche, Father?"

This is an atom: 
"Blanche!--marry Blanche!  What is come over thee, child?  Marry
Blanche!"

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas's tone was totally incredulous.  He almost laughed in his
contemptuous unbelief.

This is an atom: 
"You crede it not, Father," said Lucrece's voice--always even, and soft,
and low.  "Yet it may be true, for all that."

This is an atom: 
"In good sooth, my lass: so it may.  But what cause hast, that thou
shouldst harbour such a thought?"

This is an atom: 
"Nought more than words overheard, Father,--and divers gifts seen--
and--"

This is an atom: 
"Gifts!  The child showed us none."

This is an atom: 
"She would scantly show _you_, Father, a pair of beads of coral, with a
cross of enamel thereto--"

This is an atom: 
"Lucrece, dost thou _know_ this?"

This is an atom: 
Her father's tone was very grave and stern now.

This is an atom: 
"I do know it, of a surety.  And if you suffer me, Father, to post you
in a certain place that I wot of, behind the tapestry, you shall ere
long know it too."

This is an atom: 
Lucrece's triumphant malice had carried her a step too far.  Her
father's open, upright, honest mind was shocked at this suggestion.

This is an atom: 
"God forbid, girl!" he replied, hastily.  "I will not play the
eavesdropper on my own child.  Hast thou done this, Lucrece?"

This is an atom: 
Lucrece saw that she must make her retreat from that position, and she
did so "in excellent order."

This is an atom: 
"Oh no, Father! how could I so?  One day, I sat in the arbour yonder,
and they two walked by, discoursing: and another day, when I sat in a
window-seat in the hall, they came in a-talking, and saw me not.  I
could never do such a thing as listen unknown, Father!"

This is an atom: 
"Right, my lass: but it troubled me to hear thee name it."

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas walked on, lost in deep thought.  Lucrece was silent until he
resumed the conversation.

This is an atom: 
"Beads, and a cross!"  He spoke to himself.

This is an atom: 
"I could tell you of other gear, Father," said the low voice of the
avenger.  "As, a little image of Mary and John, which she keepeth in her
jewel-closet; and a book wherein be prayers unto the angels and the
saints.  These he hath given her."

This is an atom: 
Lucrece was making the worst of a matter in which Don Juan was
undoubtedly to blame, but Blanche was much more innocent than her sister
chose to represent her.  On the rosary Blanche looked as a long
necklace, such as were in fashion at the time; and while the elaborate
enamelled pendant certainly was a cross, it had never appeared to her
otherwise than a mere pendant.  The little image was so extremely small,
that she kept it in her jewel-closet lest it should be lost.  The book,
Don Juan's private breviary, was in Latin, in which language studious
Lucrece was a proficient, whilst idle Blanche could not have declined a
single noun.  The giver had informed her that he bestowed this breviary
on her, his best beloved, because he held it dearest of all his
treasures; and Blanche valued it on that account.  Lucrece knew all
this: for she had come upon Blanche in an unguarded moment, with the
book in her hand and the rosary round her neck, and had to some extent
forced her confidence--the more readily given, since Blanche never
suspected treachery.

This is an atom: 
"I can ensure you, Father," pursued the traitress, with an assumption of
the utmost meekness, "it hath cost me much sorrow ere I set me to speak
unto you."

This is an atom: 
"Hast spoken to Blanche aforetime?"

This is an atom: 
"Not much, Father," replied Lucrece, in a voice of apparent trouble.  "I
counted it fitter to refer the same unto your better wisdom; nor, I
think, was she like to list me."

This is an atom: 
"God have mercy!" moaned the distressed father, thoroughly awake now to
the gravity of the case.

This is an atom: 
"Maybe, Father, you shall think I have left it pass too far," pursued
Lucrece, with well-simulated grief: "yet can you guess that I would not
by my goodwill seem to carry complaint of Blanche."

This is an atom: 
"Thou hast well done, dear heart, and I thank thee," answered her
deceived father.  "But leave me now, my lass; I must think all this gear
over.  My poor darling!"

This is an atom: 
Lucrece glided away as softly as the serpent which she resembled in her
heart.

This is an atom: 
In half-an-hour Sir Thomas came back into the house, and sent Jennet to
tell his sister that he wished to speak with her in the library.  It was
characteristic, not of himself, but of his wife, that in his sorrows and
perplexities he turned instinctively to Rachel, not to her.  When
Lucrece's intelligence was laid before Rachel, though perhaps she
grieved less, she was even more shocked than her brother.  That Blanche
should think of quitting the happy and honourable estate of maidenhood,
for the slavery of marriage, was in itself a misdemeanour of the first
magnitude: but that she should have made her own choice, have received
secret gifts, and held clandestine interviews--this was an awful
instance of what human depravity could reach.

This is an atom: 
"Now, what is to be done?" asked Sir Thomas wearily.  "First with Don
John, and next with Blanche."

This is an atom: 
"Him?--the viper!  Pack him out of the house, bag and baggage!" cried
the wrathful spinster.  "The crocodile, to conspire against the peace of
the house which hath received him in his need!  Yet what better might
you look for in a man and a Papist?"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, Rachel; I cannot pack him out: he is my prisoner, think thou.  I
am set in charge of him until released by the Queen's Majesty's mandate.
All the greater need is there to keep him and Blanche apart.  In good
sooth, I wis not what to do for the best--with Blanche, most of all."

This is an atom: 
"Blanche hath had too much leisure time allowed her, and too much of her
own way," said Rachel oracularly.  "Hand her o'er to me--I will set her
a-work.  She shall not have an idle hour.  'Tis the only means to keep
silly heads in order."

This is an atom: 
"Maybe, Rachel,--maybe," said Sir Thomas with a sigh.  "Yet I fear
sorely that we must have Blanche hence.  It were constant temptation,
were she and Don John left in the same house; and though she might not
break charge--would not, I trust--yet he might.  I can rest no faith on
him well!  I must first speak to Blanche, methinks, and then--"

This is an atom: 
"Speak to her!--whip her well!  By my troth, but I would mark her!"
cried Rachel, in a passion.

This is an atom: 
"Nay, Rachel, that wouldst thou not," answered her brother, smiling
sadly.  "Did the child but whimper, thy fingers would leave go the rod.
Thy bark is right fearful, good Sister; but some men's sweet words be no
softer than thy bite."

This is an atom: 
"There is charity in all things, of course," said Rachel, cooling down.

This is an atom: 
"There is a deal in thee," returned Sir Thomas, "for them that know
where to seek it.  Well, come with me to Orige; she must be told, I
reckon: and then we will send for Blanche."

This is an atom: 
Rachel opened her lips, but suddenly shut them without speaking, and
kept them drawn close.  Perhaps, had she not thought better of it, what
might have been spoken was not altogether complimentary to Lady Enville.

This is an atom: 
That very comfortable dame sat in her cushioned chair in the boudoir--
there were no easy-chairs then, except as rendered so by cushions; and
plenty of soft thick cushions were a very necessary part of the
furniture of a good house.  Her Ladyship was dressed in the pink of the
fashion, so far as it had reached her tailor at Kirkham; and she was
turning over the leaves of a new play, entitled "The Comedie of
Errour"--one of the earliest productions of the young Warwickshire
actor, William Shakspere by name.  She put her book down with a yawn
when her husband and his sister came in.

This is an atom: 
"How much colder 'tis grown this last hour or twain!" said she.
"Prithee, Sir Thomas, call for more wood."

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas shouted as desired--the quickest way of settling matters--and
when Jennet had come and gone with the fuel, he glanced into the little
chamber to see if it were vacant.  Finding no one there, he drew the
bolt and sat down.

This is an atom: 
"Gramercy, Sir Thomas! be we all prisoners?" demanded his wife with a
little laugh.

This is an atom: 
"Orige," replied Sir Thomas, "Rachel and I have a thing to show thee."

This is an atom: 
"I thought you looked both mighty sad," remarked the lady calmly.

This is an atom: 
"Dost know where is Blanche?"

This is an atom: 
"Good lack, no!  I never wis where Blanche is."

This is an atom: 
"Orige, wouldst like to have Blanche wed?"

This is an atom: 
"Blanche!--to whom?"

This is an atom: 
"To Don John de Las Rojas."

This is an atom: 
"Gramercy!  Sir Thomas, you never mean it?"

This is an atom: 
"He and Blanche mean it, whate'er I may."

This is an atom: 
"Good lack, how fortunate!  Why, he will be a Marquis one day--and hath
great store of goods and money.  I never looked for such luck.  Have you
struck hands with him, Sir Thomas?"

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas pressed his lips together, and glanced at his sister with an
air of helpless vexation.  Had it just occurred to him that the pretty
doll whom he had chosen to be the partner of his life was a little
wanting in the departments of head and heart?

This is an atom: 
"What, Orige--an enemy?" he said.

This is an atom: 
"Don John is not an enemy," returned Lady Enville, with a musical little
laugh.  "We have all made a friend of him."

This is an atom: 
"Ay--and have been fools, perchance, to do it.  'Tis ill toying with a
snake.  But yet once--a Papist?"

This is an atom: 
"Good lack! some Papists will get to Heaven, trow."

This is an atom: 
"May God grant it!" replied Sir Thomas seriously.  "But surely, Orige,
surely thou wouldst never have our own child a Papist?"

This is an atom: 
"I trust Blanche has too much good sense for such foolery, Sir Thomas,"
said the lady.  "But if no--well, 'tis an old religion, at the least,
and a splendrous.  You would never let such a chance slip through your
fingers, for the sake of Papistry?"

This is an atom: 
"No, Sister--for the sake of the Gospel," said Rachel grimly.

This is an atom: 
"Thou wist my meaning, Rachel," pursued Lady Enville.  "Well, in very
deed, Sir Thomas, I do think it were ill done to let such a chance go by
us.  'Tis like throwing back the gifts of Providence.  Do but see, how
marvellously this young man was brought hither!  And now, if he hath
made suit for Blanche, I pray you, never say him nay!  I would call it
wicked to do the same.  Really wicked, Sir Thomas!"

This is an atom: 
Lady Enville pinched the top cushion into a different position, with
what was energy for her.  There was silence for a minute.  Rachel sat
looking grimly into the fire, the personification of determined
immobility.  Sir Thomas was shading his eyes with his hand.  He was
drinking just then a very bitter cup: and it was none the sweeter for
the recollection that he had mixed it himself.  His favourite child--for
Blanche was that--seemed to be going headlong to her ruin: and her
mother not only refused to aid in saving her, but was incapable of
seeing any need that she should be saved.

This is an atom: 
"Well, Orige," he said at last, "thou takest it other than I looked for.
I had meant for to bid thee speak with Blanche.  Her own mother surely
were the fittest to do the same.  But since this is so, I see no help
but that we have her here, before us three.  It shall be harder for the
child, and I would fain have spared her.  But if it must be,--why, it
must."

This is an atom: 
"She demeriteth [merits] no sparing," said Rachel sternly.

This is an atom: 
"Truly, Sir Thomas," responded his wife, "if I am to speak my mind, I
shall bid Blanche God speed therein.  So, if you desire to let [hinder]
the same--but I think it pity a thousand-fold you should--you were
better to see her without me."

This is an atom: 
"Nay, Orige!  Shall I tell the child to her face that her father and her
mother cannot agree touching her disposal?"

This is an atom: 
"She will see it if she come hither," was the answer.

This is an atom: 
"But cannot we persuade thee, Orige?"

This is an atom: 
"Certes, nay!" replied she, with the obstinacy of feeble minds.  "Truly,
I blame not Rachel, for she alway opposeth her to marriage, howso it
come.  She stood out against Meg her trothing.  But for you, Sir
Thomas,--I am verily astonied that you would deny Blanche such good
fortune."

This is an atom: 
"I would deny the maid nought that were for her good, Orige," said the
father, sadly.

This is an atom: 
"`Good,' in sweet sooth!--as though it should be ill for her to wear a
coronet on her head, and carry her pocket brimful of ducats!  Where be
your eyes, Sir Thomas?"

This is an atom: 
"Thine be dazed, methinks, with the ducats and the coronet, Sister," put
in Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"Well, have your way," said Lady Enville, spreading out her hands, as if
she were letting Blanche's good fortune drop from them: "have your way!
You will have it, I count, as whatso I may say.  I pray God the poor
child be not heart-broken.  Howbeit, _I_ had better loved her than to do
thus."

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas was silent, not because he did not feel the taunt, but
because he did feel it too bitterly to trust himself with speech.  But
Rachel rose from her chair, deeply stung, and spoke very plain words
indeed.

This is an atom: 
"Orige Enville," she said, "thou art a born fool!"

This is an atom: 
"Gramercy, Rachel!" ejaculated her sister-in-law, as much moved out of
her graceful ease of manner as it lay in her torpid nature to be.

This is an atom: 
"You can deal with the maid betwixt you two," pursued the spinster.  "I
will not bear a hand in the child's undoing."

This is an atom: 
And she marched out of the room, and slammed the door behind her.

This is an atom: 
"Good lack!" was Lady Enville's comment.

This is an atom: 
Without resuming the subject, Sir Thomas walked to the other door and
opened it.

This is an atom: 
"Blanche!" he said, in that hard, constrained tone which denotes not
want of feeling, but the endeavour to hide it.

This is an atom: 
"Blanche is in the garden, Father," said Margaret, coming out of the
hall.  "Shall I seek her for you?"

This is an atom: 
"Ay, bid her come, my lass," said he quietly.

This is an atom: 
Margaret looked up inquiringly, in consequence of her father's unusual
tone; but he gave her no explanation, and she went to call Blanche.

This is an atom: 
That young lady was engaged at the moment in a deeply interesting
conversation with Don Juan upon the terrace.  They had been exchanging
locks of hair, and vows of eternal fidelity.  Margaret's approaching
step was heard just in time to resume an appearance of courteous
composure; and Don Juan, who was possessed of remarkable versatility,
observed as she came up to them--

This is an atom: 
"The clouds be a-gathering, Dona Blanca.  Methinks there shall be rain
ere it be long."

This is an atom: 
"How now, Meg?--whither away?" asked Blanche, with as much calmness as
she could assume; but she was by no means so clever an actor as her
companion.

This is an atom: 
"Father calleth thee, Blanche, from Mother's bower."

This is an atom: 
"How provoking!" said Blanche to herself.  Aloud she answered, "Good; I
thank thee, Meg."

This is an atom: 
Blanche sauntered slowly into the boudoir.  Lady Enville reclined in her
chair, engaged again with her comedy, as though she had said all that
could be said on the subject under discussion.  Sir Thomas stood leaning
against the jamb of the chimney-piece, gazing sadly into the fire.

This is an atom: 
"Meg saith you seek me, Father."

This is an atom: 
"I do, my child."

This is an atom: 
His grave tone chilled Blanche's highly-wrought feelings with a vague
anticipation of coming evil.  He set a chair for her, with a courtesy
which he always showed to a woman, not excluding his daughters.

This is an atom: 
"Sit, Blanche: we desire to know somewhat of thee."

This is an atom: 
The leaves of the play in Lady Enville's hand fluttered; but she had
just sense enough not to speak.

This is an atom: 
"Blanche, look me in the face, and answer truly:--Hath there been any
passage of love betwixt Don John and thee?"

This is an atom: 
Blanche's heart gave a great leap into her throat,--not perhaps
anatomically, but so far as her sensations were concerned.  She played
for a minute with her gold chain in silence.  --Preserving their Game!"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER V. THE PHOENIX.

This is an atom: 
Putting which four singular Chapters together, and alongside of
them numerous hints, and even direct utterances, scattered over
these Writings of his, we come upon the startling yet not quite
unlooked-for conclusion, that Teufelsdrockh is one of those who
consider Society, properly so called, to be as good as extinct; and
that only the gregarious feelings, and old inherited habitudes, at
this juncture, hold us from Dispersion, and universal national,
civil, domestic and personal war!

This is an atom: 
He says expressly: "For the last three centuries, above all for the
last three quarters of a century, that same Pericardial Nervous
Tissue (as we named it) of Religion, where lies the Life-essence
of Society, has been smote at and perforated, needfully and needlessly;
till now it is quite rent into shreds; and Society, long pining,
diabetic, consumptive, can be regarded as defunct; for those
spasmodic, galvanic sprawlings are not life; neither indeed will
they endure, galvanize as you may, beyond two days."

This is an atom: 
"Call ye that a Society," cries he again, "where there is no longer
any Social Idea extant; not so much as the Idea of a common Home,
but only of a common over-crowded Lodging-house?

This is an atom: 
Where each, isolated, regardless of his neighbor, turned against his
neighbor, clutches what he can get, and cries 'Mine!'

This is an atom: 
and calls it Peace, because, in the cut-purse and cut-throat Scramble,
no steel knives, but only a far cunninger sort, can be employed?
Where Friendship, Communion, has become an incredible tradition;
and your holiest Sacramental Supper is a smoking Tavern Dinner,
with Cook for Evangelist?

This is an atom: 
Where your Priest has no tongue but for plate-licking: and your
high Guides and Governors cannot guide; but on all hands hear it
passionately proclaimed: _Laissez faire_; Leave us alone of _your_
guidance, such light is darker than darkness; eat you your wages,
and sleep!

This is an atom: 
"Thus, too," continues he, "does an observant eye discern everywhere
that saddest spectacle: The Poor perishing, like neglected, foundered
Draught-Cattle, of Hunger and Overwork; the Rich, still more
wretchedly, of Idleness, Satiety, and Overgrowth.

This is an atom: 
The Highest in rank, at length, without honor from the Lowest; scarcely,
with a little mouth-honor, as from tavern-waiters who expect to put
it in the bill.

This is an atom: 
Once-sacred Symbols fluttering as empty Pageants, whereof men grudge
even the expense; a World becoming dismantled: in one word, the STATE
fallen speechless, from obesity and apoplexy; the STATE shrunken
into a Police-Office, straitened to get its pay!"

This is an atom: 
We might ask, are there many "observant eyes," belonging to
practical men in England or elsewhere, which have descried these phenomena;
or is it only from the mystic elevation of a German _Wahngasse_
that such wonders are visible?

This is an atom: 
Teufelsdrockh contends that the aspect of a "deceased or expiring
Society" fronts us everywhere, so that whoso runs may read.

This is an atom: 
Many have done the
like--"

This is an atom: 
"And suffered bitterly by reason thereof."

This is an atom: 
"Nay, now!--why so?  You see the child's heart is set thereon.  Be ruled
by me, I pray you, and leave your fantastical objections, and go seek
Don John.  Make him to grant you oath, on the honour of a Spanish
gentleman, that Blanche shall be allowed the free using of her own
faith--and what more would you?"

This is an atom: 
"If thou send me to seek him, Orige, I shall measure swords with him."

This is an atom: 
Blanche uttered a little scream.  Lady Enville laughed her soft, musical
laugh--the first thing which had originally attracted her husband's
fancy to her, eighteen years before.

This is an atom: 
"I marvel wherefore!" she said, laying down the play, and taking up her
pomander--a ball of scented drugs, enclosed in a golden network, which
hung from her girdle by a gold chain.

This is an atom: 
"Wherefore?" repeated Sir Thomas more warmly.  "For plucking my fairest
flower, when I had granted unto him but shelter in my garden-house!"

This is an atom: 
"He has not plucked it yet," said Lady Enville, handling the pomander
delicately, so that too much scent should not escape at once.

This is an atom: 
"He hath done as ill," replied Sir Thomas shortly.

This is an atom: 
Lady Enville calmly inhaled the fragrance, as if nothing more serious
than itself were on her mind.  Blanche sat still, playing with her
chain, but looking troubled and afraid, and casting furtive glances at
her father, who was pacing slowly up and down the room.

This is an atom: 
"Orige," he said suddenly, "can Blanche make her ready to leave home?--
and how soon?"

This is an atom: 
Blanche looked up fearfully.

This is an atom: 
"What wis I, Sir Thomas?" languidly answered the lady.  "I reckon she
could be ready in a month or so.  Where would you have her go?"

This is an atom: 
"A month!  I mean to-night."

This is an atom: 
"To-night, Sir Thomas!  'Tis not possible.  Why, she hath scantly a gown
fit to show."

This is an atom: 
"She must go, nathless, Orige.  And it shall be to the parsonage.  They
will do it, I know.  And Clare must go with her."

This is an atom: 
"The parsonage!" said Lady Enville contemptuously.  "Oh ay, she can go
there any hour.  They should scantly know whether she wear satin or
grogram.  Call for Clare, if you so desire it--she must see to the
gear."

This is an atom: 
"Canst not thou, Orige?"

This is an atom: 
"I, Sir Thomas!--with my feeble health!"

This is an atom: 
And Lady Enville looked doubly languid as she let her head sink back
among the cushions.  Sir Thomas looked at her for a minute, sighed
again, and then, opening the door, called out two or three names.
Barbara answered, and he bade her "Send hither Mistress Clare."

This is an atom: 
Clare was rather startled when she presented herself at the boudoir
door.  Blanche, she saw, was in trouble of some kind; Lady Enville
looked annoyed, after her languid fashion; and the grave, sad look of
Sir Thomas was an expression as new to Clare as it had been to the
others.

This is an atom: 
"Clare," said her step-father, "I am about to entrust thee with a
weighty matter.  Are thy shoulders strong enough to bear such burden?"

This is an atom: 
"I will do my best, Father," answered Clare, whose eyes bespoke both
sympathy and readiness for service.

This is an atom: 
"I think thou wilt, my good lass.  Go to, then:--choose thou, out of
thine own and Blanche's gear, such matter as ye may need for a month or
so.  Have Barbara to aid thee.  I would fain ye were hence ere
supper-time, so haste all thou canst.  I will go and speak with Master
Tremayne, but I am well assured he shall receive you."

This is an atom: 
A month at the parsonage!  How delightful!--thought Clare.  Yet
something by no means delightful had evidently led to it.

This is an atom: 
"Clare!" her mother called to her as she was leaving the room,--"Clare!
have a care thou put up Blanche's blue kersey.  I would not have her in
rags, even yonder; and that brown woolsey shall not be well for another
month.  And,--Blanche, child, go thou with Clare; see thou have ruffs
enow; and take thy pearl chain withal."

This is an atom: 
Blanche was relieved by being told to accompany her sister.  She had
been afraid that she was about to be put in the dark closet like a
naughty child, with no permission to exercise her own will about
anything.  And just now, the parsonage looked to her a dark closet
indeed.

This is an atom: 
But Sir Thomas turned quickly on hearing this, with--"Orige, I desire
Blanche to abide here.  If there be aught she would have withal, she can
tell Clare of it."

This is an atom: 
And, closing the door, he left the three together.

This is an atom: 
"Oh!--very well," said Lady Enville, rather crossly.  Blanche sat down
again.

This is an atom: 
"What shall I put for thee, Blanche?" asked Clare gently.

This is an atom: 
"What thou wilt," muttered Blanche sulkily.

This is an atom: 
"I will lay out what I think shall like thee best," was her sister's
kind reply.

This is an atom: 
"I would like my green sleeves, [Note 1] and my tawny kirtle," said
Blanche in a slightly mollified tone.

This is an atom: 
"Very well," replied Clare, and hastened away to execute her commission,
calling Barbara as she went.

This is an atom: 
"What ado doth Sir Thomas make of this matter!" said Lady Enville,
applying again to the pomander.  "If he would have been ruled by me--
Blanche, child, hast any other edge of pearl?"  [Note 2.]

This is an atom: 
"Ay, Mother," said Blanche absently.

This is an atom: 
"Metrusteth 'tis not so narrow as that thou wearest.  It becometh thee
not.  And the guarding of that gown is ill done--who set it on?"

This is an atom: 
Blanche did not remember--and, just then, she did not care.

This is an atom: 
"Whoso it were, she hath need be ashamed thereof.  Come hither, child."

This is an atom: 
Blanche obeyed, and while her mother gave a pull here, and smoothed down
a fold there, she stood patiently enough in show, but most unquietly in
heart.

This is an atom: 
"Nought would amend it, save to pick it off and set it on again," said
Lady Enville, resigning her endeavours.  "Now, Blanche, if thou art to
abide at the parsonage, where I cannot have an eye upon thee, I pray
thee remember thyself, who thou art, and take no fantasies in thine head
touching Arthur Tremayne."

This is an atom: 
Arthur Tremayne!  What did Blanche care for Arthur Tremayne?

This is an atom: 
"I am sore afeard, Blanche, lest thou shouldst forget thee.  It will not
matter for Clare.  If he be a parson's son, yet is he a Tremayne of
Tremayne,--quite good enough for Clare, if no better hap should chance
unto her.  But thou art of better degree by thy father's side, and we
look to have thee well matched, according thereto.  Thy father will not
hear of Don John, because he is a Papist, and a Spaniard to boot:
elsewise I had seen no reason to gainsay thee, poor child!  But of
course he must have his way.  Only have a care, Blanche, and take not up
with none too mean for thy degree,--specially now, while thou art out of
our wardship."

This is an atom: 
There was no answer from Blanche.

This is an atom: 
"Mistress Tremayne will have a care of thee, maybe," pursued her mother,
unfurling her fan--merely as a plaything, for the weather did not by any
means require it.  "Yet 'tis but nature she should work to have Arthur
well matched, and she wot, of course, that thou shouldst be a rare catch
for him.  So do thou have a care, Blanche."

This is an atom: 
And Lady Enville, leaning back among her cushions, furled and unfurled
her handsome fan, alike unconscious and uncaring that she had been
guilty of the greatest injustice to poor Thekla Tremayne.

This is an atom: 
There was a rap at the door, and enter Rachel, looking as if she had
imbibed an additional pound of starch since leaving the room.

This is an atom: 
"Sister, would you have Blanche's tartaryn gown withal, or no?"

This is an atom: 
"The crimson?  Let me see," said Lady Enville reflectively.  "Ay,
Rachel,--she may as well have it.  I would not have thee wear it but for
Sundays and holy days, Blanche.  For common days, _there_, thy blue
kersey is full good enough."

This is an atom: 
Without any answer, and deliberately ignoring the presence of Blanche,
Rachel stalked away.

This is an atom: 
It was a weary interval until Sir Thomas, returned.  Now and then Clare
flitted in and out, to ask her mother's wishes concerning different
things: Jennet came in with fresh wood for the fire; Lady Enville
continued to give cautions and charges, as they occurred to her, now
regarding conduct and now costume: but a miserable time Blanche found
it.  She felt herself, and she fancied every one else considered her, in
dire disgrace.  Yet beneath all the mortification, the humiliation, and
the grief over which she was brooding, there was a conviction in the
depth of Blanche's heart, resist it as she might, that the father who
was crossing her will was a wiser and truer friend to her than the
mother who would have granted it.

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas came at last.  He wore a very tired look, and seemed as if he
had grown several years older in that day.

This is an atom: 
"Well, all is at a point, Orige," he said.  "Master Tremayne hath right
kindly given consent to receive both the maids into his house, for so
long a time as we may desire it; but Mistress Tremayne would have
Barbara come withal, if it may stand with thy conveniency.  She hath but
one serving-maid, as thou wist; and it should be more comfortable to the
childre to have her, beside the saving of some pain [trouble, labour]
unto Mistress Tremayne."

This is an atom: 
"They can have her well enough, trow," answered Lady Enville.  "I seldom
make use of her.  Jennet doth all my matters."

This is an atom: 
"But how for Meg and Lucrece?"

This is an atom: 
Barbara's position in the household was what we should term the young
ladies' maid; but maids in those days were on very familiar and
confidential terms with their ladies.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, they will serve them some other way," said Lady Enville carelessly.

This is an atom: 
The convenience of other people was of very slight account in her
Ladyship's eyes, so long as there was no interference with her own.

This is an atom: 
"Cannot Kate or Doll serve?" asked Sir Thomas--referring to the two
chambermaids.

This is an atom: 
"Of course they can, if they must," returned their nominal mistress.
"Good lack, Sir Thomas!--ask Rachel; I wis nought about the house gear."

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas walked off, and said no more.

This is an atom: 
With great difficulty and much hurrying, the two girls contrived to
leave the house just before supper.  Sir Thomas was determined that
there should be no further interview between Blanche and Don Juan.  Nor
would he have one himself, until he had time to consider his course more
fully.  He supped in his own chamber.  Lady Enville presented herself in
the hall, and was particularly gracious; Rachel uncommonly stiff;
Margaret still and meditative; Lucrece outwardly demure, secretly
triumphant.

This is an atom: 
Supper at the parsonage was deferred for an hour that evening, until the
guests should arrive.  Mrs Tremayne received both with a motherly kiss.
Foolish as she thought Blanche, she looked upon her as being almost as
much a victim of others' folly as a sufferer for her own: and Thekla
Tremayne knew well that the knowledge that we have ourselves to thank
for our suffering does not lessen the pain, but increases it.

This is an atom: 
The kindness with which Blanche was received--rather as an honoured
guest than as a naughty child sent to Coventry--was soothing to her
ruffled feelings.  Still she had a great deal to, bear.  She was deeply
grieved to be suddenly and completely parted from Don Juan; and she
imagined that he would be as much distressed as herself.  But the idea
of rebelling against her father's decree never entered her head; neither
did the least suspicion of Lucrece's share in the matter.

This is an atom: 
Blanche was rather curious to ascertain how much Clare knew of her
proceedings, and what she thought of them.  Now it so happened that in
the haste of the departure, Clare had been told next to nothing.  The
reason of this hasty flight to the parsonage was all darkness to her,
except for the impression which she gathered from various items that the
step thus taken had reference not to herself, but to Blanche.  What her
sister had done, was doing, or was expected to do, which required such
summary stoppage, Clare could not even guess.  Barbara was quite as
ignorant.  The interviews between Blanche and Don Juan had been so
secret, and so little suspected, that the idea of connecting him with
the affair did not occur to either.

This is an atom: 
One precious relic Blanche had brought with her--the lock of hair
received from Don Juan on that afternoon which was so short a time back,
and felt so terribly long--past and gone, part of another epoch
altogether.  Indeed, she had not had any opportunity of parting with it,
except by yielding it to her father; and for this she saw no necessity,
since he had laid no orders on her concerning Don Juan's gifts.  While
Clare knelt at her prayers, and Barbara was out of the room, Blanche
took the opportunity to indulge in another look at her treasure.  It was
silky black, smooth and glossy; tied with a fragment of blue ribbon,
which Don Juan had assured her was the colour of truth.

This is an atom: 
"Is he looking at the ringlet of fair hair which I gave him?" thought
she fondly.  "He will be true to me.  Whate'er betide, I know he will be
true!"

This is an atom: 
Poor little Blanche!

This is an atom: 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an atom: 
Note 1.  Sleeves were then separate from the dress, and were fastened
into it when put on, according to the fancy of the wearer.

This is an atom: 
Note 2.  Apparently the plaited border worn under the French cap.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER EIGHT.

This is an atom: 
THEKLA COMES TO THE RESCUE.

This is an atom: 
"It were a well-spent journey,
  Though seven deaths lay between."

This is an atom: 
_A.R. Cousins_.

This is an atom: 
"Lysken, didst thou ever love any one very much?"

This is an atom: 
Blanche spoke dreamily, as she stood leaning against the side of the
window in the parsonage parlour, and with busy idleness tied knots in
her gold chain, which at once untied themselves by their own weight.

This is an atom: 
"Most truly," said Lysken, looking up with an expression of surprise.
"I love all here--very much."

This is an atom: 
"Ah! but--not here?"

This is an atom: 
"Certes.  I loved Mayken Floriszoon, who died at Leyden, the day after
help came.  And I loved Aunt Jacobine; and Vrouw Van Vliet, who took
care of me before I came hither.  And I loved--O Blanche, how dearly!--
my father and my mother."

This is an atom: 
Blanche's ideas were running in one grove, and Lysken's in quite a
different one.

This is an atom: 
"Ay, but I mean, Lysken--another sort of love."

This is an atom: 
"Another sort!" said Lysken, looking up again from the stocking which
she was darning.  "Is there any sort but one?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh ay!" responded Blanche, feeling her experience immeasurably past
that of Lysken.

This is an atom: 
"Thou art out of my depth, Blanche, methinks," said Lysken, re-threading
her needle in a practical unromantic way.  "Love is love, for me.  It
differeth, of course, in degree; we love not all alike.  But, methinks,
even a man's love for God, though it be needs deeper and higher far,
must yet be the same manner of love that he hath for his father, or his
childre, or his friends.  I see not how it can be otherwise."

This is an atom: 
Blanche was shocked at the business-like style in which Lysken darned
while she talked.  Had such a question been asked of herself, the
stocking would have stood still till it was settled.  She doubted
whether to pursue the subject.  What was the use of talking upon
thrilling topics to a girl who could darn stockings while she calmly
analysed love?  Still, she wanted somebody's opinion; and she had an
instinctive suspicion that Clare would be no improvement upon her
cousin.

This is an atom: 
"Well, but," she said hesitatingly, "there is another fashion of love,
Lysken.  The sort that a woman hath toward her husband."

This is an atom: 
"That is deeper, I guess, than she hath for her father and mother, else
would she not leave them to go with him," said Lysken quietly; "but I
see not wherein it should be another sort."

This is an atom: 
"'Tis plain thou didst never feel the same, Lysken," returned Blanche
sentimentally.

This is an atom: 
"How could I, when I never had an husband?" answered Lysken, darning
away tranquilly.

This is an atom: 
"But didst thou never come across any that--that thou shouldst fain--"

This is an atom: 
"Shouldst fain--what?" said Lysken, as Blanche paused.

This is an atom: 
"Shouldst have liked to wed," said Blanche, plunging into the matter.

This is an atom: 
"Gramercy, nay!" replied Lysken, turning the stocking to look at the
other side.  "And I should have thought shame if I had."

This is an atom: 
Blanche felt this speech a reflection on herself.

This is an atom: 
"Lysken!" she cried pettishly.

This is an atom: 
Lysken put down the stocking, and looked at Blanche.

This is an atom: 
"What meanest thou?" she inquired, in a plain matter-of-fact style which
was extremely aggravating to that young lady.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, 'tis to no good to tell thee," returned Blanche loftily.  "Thou
wist nought at all thereabout."

This is an atom: 
"_What_ about?" demanded Lysken, to whom Blanche was unintelligible.

This is an atom: 
"About nought.  Let be!"

This is an atom: 
"I cannot tell wherefore thou art vexed, Blanche," said Lysken, resuming
her darning, in that calm style which is eminently provoking to any one
in a passion.

This is an atom: 
"Thou seest not every matter in the world," retorted Blanche, with an
air of superiority.  "And touching this matter, 'tis plain thou wist
nothing.  Verily, thou hast gain therein; for he that hath bettered
knowledge--as saith Solomon--hath but increased sorrow."

This is an atom: 
"Blanche, I do not know whereof thou art talking!  Did I put thee out by
saying I had thought shame to have cared to wed with any, or what was
it?  Why, wouldst not thou?"

This is an atom: 
This final affront was as the last straw to the camel.  Deigning no
answer, which she felt would be an angry one, Blanche marched away like
an offended queen, and sat down on a chair in the hall as if she were
enthroning herself upon a pedestal.  Mrs Tremayne was in the hall, and
the door into the parlour being open, she had heard the conversation.
She made no allusion to it at the time, but tried to turn the girl's
thoughts to another topic.  Gathering from it, however, the tone of
Blanche's mind, she resolved to give her a lesson which should not eject
her roughly from her imaginary pedestal--but make her come down from it
of her own accord.

This is an atom: 
"Poor foolish child!" said Mrs Tremayne to herself.  "She has mistaken
a rushlight for the sun, and she thinks her horizon wider than that of
any one else.  She is despising Lysken, at this moment, as a shallow,
prosaic character, who cannot enter into the depth of her feelings, and
has not attained the height of her experience.  And there are heights
and depths in Lysken that Blanche will never reach."

This is an atom: 
Mrs Tremayne found her opportunity the next evening.  She was alone
with Blanche in the parlour; and knowing pretty well what every one was
doing, she anticipated a quiet half-hour.

This is an atom: 
Of all the persons to whom Blanche was known, there was not one so well
fitted to deal with her in this crisis as the friend in whose hands she
had been placed for safety.  Thirty years before, Thekla Tremayne had
experienced a very dark trial,--had become miserably familiar with the
heart-sickness of hope deferred,--during four years when the best
beloved of Robin Tremayne had known no certainty whether he was living
or dead, but had every reason rather to fear the latter.  Compared with
a deep, long-tried love like hers, this sentimental fancy over which
Blanche was making herself cross and unhappy was almost trivial.  But
Mrs Tremayne knew that trouble is trouble, if it be based on folly; she
thought that she recognised in Blanche, silly though she was in some
points, a nobler nature than that of the vain, selfish, indolent mother
from whom the daughter derived many of the surface features of her
character: and she longed to see that nobler nature rouse itself to
work, and sweep away the outward vanity and giddiness.  It might be that
even this would show her the real hollowness of the gilded world; that
this one hour's journey over the weary land would help to drive her for
shelter to the shadow of the great Rock.

This is an atom: 
Blanche sat on a low stool at Mrs Tremayne's feet, gazing earnestly
into the fire.  Neither had spoken for some time, during which the only
sounds were the slight movements of Mrs Tremayne as she sat at work,
and now and then a heavy sigh from Blanche.  When the fifth of these was
drawn, the lady gently laid her hand on the girl's head.

This is an atom: 
"Apothecaries say, Blanche, that sighing shorteneth life."

This is an atom: 
Blanche looked up.  "I reckon you count me but a fool, Mistress
Tremayne, as do all other."

This is an atom: 
"Blanche," said her friend, "I will tell thee a story, and after that
thou shall judge for thyself what account I make of thee."

This is an atom: 
Blanche looked interested, and altered her position so as to watch Mrs
Tremayne's face while she was speaking.

This is an atom: 
"Once upon a time, Blanche,--in the days of Queen Mary,--there was a
priest that had a daughter of thine own age--sixteen years.  In those
days, as I cast no doubt thou hast heard, all wedded priests were laid
under ban, and at the last a day was set whereon all they must needs
part from their wives.  Though my story take root ere this, yet I pray
thee bear it in mind, for we shall come thereto anon.  Well, this
damsel, with assent of her father, was troth-plight unto a young man
whom she loved very dearly; but seeing her youth, their wedding was yet
some way off.  In good sooth, her father had given assent under bond
that they should not wed for three years; and the three years should be
run out in June, 1553."

This is an atom: 
"Three years!" said Blanche, under her breath.

This is an atom: 
"This young man was endeavouring himself for the priesthood.  During the
time of King Edward, thou wist, there was no displeasure taken at
married priests; and so far as all they might see when the three years
began to run, all was like to go smooth enough.  But when they were run
out, all England was trembling with fear, and men took much thought
[felt much anxiety] for the future.  King Edward lay on his dying bed;
and there was good reason--ah! more reason than any man then knew!--to
fear that the fair estate of such as loved the Gospel should die with
him.  For a maid then to wed a priest, or for a wedded man to receive
orders, was like to a man casting him among wild beasts: there was but a
chance that he might not be devoured.  So it stood, that if this young
man would save his life, he must give up one of two things,--either the
service which for many months back he had in his own heart offered to
God, or the maiden whom, for a time well-nigh as long, he had hoped
should be his wife.  What, thinkest thou, should he have done, Blanche?"

This is an atom: 
"I wis not, in very deed, Mistress Tremayne," said Blanche, shaking her
head.  "I guess he should have given up rather her,--but I know not.
Methinks it had been sore hard to give up either.  And they were
troth-plight."

This is an atom: 
"Well,--I will tell thee what they did.  They did appoint a set time, at
the end whereof, should he not then have received orders (it being not
possible, all the Protestant Bishops being prisoners), he should then
resign the hope thereof, and they twain be wed.  The three years, thou
wist, were then gone.  They fixed the time two years more beyond,--to
run out in August, 1555--which should make five years' waiting in all."

This is an atom: 
"And were they wed then?" said Blanche, drawing a long breath.

This is an atom: 
"When the two further years were run out, Blanche--"

This is an atom: 
Blanche was a little startled to hear how Mrs Tremayne's voice
trembled.  She was evidently telling "an owre true tale."

This is an atom: 
"The maid's father, and he that should have been her husband, were taken
in one day.  When those two years were run out, her father lay hidden
away, having 'scaped from prison, until he might safely be holpen out of
the country over seas: and the young man was a captive in Exeter Castle,
and in daily expectation of death."

This is an atom: 
"Good lack!"

This is an atom: 
"And two years thereafter, the young man was had away from Exeter unto
Woburn, and there set in the dread prison called Little Ease, shaped
like to a funnel, wherein a man might neither stand, nor sit, nor lie,
nor kneel."

This is an atom: 
"O Mistress Tremayne!  Heard any ever the like!  And what came of the
maiden, poor soul?"

This is an atom: 
The needlework in Mrs Tremayne's hand was still now; and if any one had
been present who had known her thirty years before, he would have said
that a shadow of her old look at that terrible time had come back to her
deep sweet eyes.

This is an atom: 
"My child, God allowed her to be brought very low.  At the first, she
was upheld mightily by His consolations: and they that saw her said how
well she bare it.  But 'tis not alway the first blush of a sorrow that
trieth the heart most sorely.  And there came after this a time--when it
was an old tale to them that knew her, and their comforting was given
over,--a day came when all failed her.  Nay, I should have said rather,
all seemed to fail her.  God failed her not; but her eyes were holden,
and she saw Him not beside her.  It was darkness, an horror of great
darkness, that fell upon her.  The Devil came close enough; he was very
busy with her.  Was there any hope? quoth he.  Nay, none, or but very
little.  Then of what worth were God's promises to hear and deliver?  He
had passed His word, and He kept it not.  Was God able to help?--was He
true to His promise?--go to, was there any God in Heaven at all?  And
so, Blanche, she was tossed to and fro on the swelling billows, now up,
seeing a faint ray of light, now down, in the depth of the darkness:
yet, through all, with an half-palsied grasp, so to speak, upon the hem
of Christ's garment, a groping after Him with numb hands that scarce
felt whether they held or no.  O Blanche, it was like the plague in the
land of Egypt--it was darkness that might be felt!"

This is an atom: 
Blanche listened in awed interest.

This is an atom: 
"Dear heart, the Lord hath passed word to help His people in their need;
but He saith not any where that He will alway help them right as they
would have it.  We be prone to think there is but one fashion of help,
and that if we be not holpen after our own manner, we be not holpen at
all.  Yet, if thou take a penny from a poor beggar, and give him in the
stead thereof an angel [half-sovereign], thou hast given him alms,
though he have lost the penny.  Alas, for us poor beggars! we fall to
weeping o'er our penny till our eyes be too dim with tears to see the
gold of God's alms.  Dear Blanche, I would not have thee miss the gold."

This is an atom: 
"I scantly conceive your meaning, dear Mistress."

This is an atom: 
"We will come back to that anon.  I will first tell thee what befel her
of whom I spake."

This is an atom: 
"Ay, I would fain hear the rest."

This is an atom: 
"Well, there were nigh four years of that fearful darkness.  She
well-nigh forgat that God might have some better thing in store for her,
to the which He was leading her all the time, along this weary road.
She thought He dealt hardly with her.  At times, when the darkness was
at the thickest, she fancied that all might be a delusion: that there
was no God at all, or none that had any compassion upon men.  But it was
not His meaning, to leave one of His own in that black pit of despair.
He lifted one end of the dark veil.  When the four years were over,--
that is, when Queen Elizabeth, that now is, happily succeeded to her
evil sister,--God gave the maiden back her father safe."

This is an atom: 
Blanche uttered a glad "Oh!"

This is an atom: 
"And He gave her more than that, Blanche.  He sent her therewith a
message direct from Himself.  Thou lookest on me somewhat doubtfully,
dear heart, as though thou shouldst say, Angels bring no wolds from
Heaven now o' days.  Well, in very sooth, I wis not whether they do or
no.  We see them not: can we speak more boldly than to say this?  Yet
one thing I know, Blanche: God can send messages to His childre in their
hearts, howso they may come.  And what was this word? say thine eyes.
Well, sweeting, it was the softest of all the chidings that we hear Him
to have laid on His disciples,--`O thou of little faith, wherefore didst
thou doubt?'  As though He should say,--`Thou mightest have doubted of
the fulfilling of thy special hope; yet wherefore doubt _Me_?  Would I
have taken pleasure in bereaving thee of aught that was not hurtful?
Could I not have given thee much more than this?  Because I made thine
heart void, that I might fill it with Myself,--child, did I love thee
less, or more?'"

This is an atom: 
Mrs Tremayne paused so long, that Blanche asked timidly--"And did he
come again at last, or no?"

This is an atom: 
A slight, sudden movement of her friend's head showed that her thoughts
were far away, and that she came back to the present with something like
an effort.

This is an atom: 
"Methinks, dear heart," Mrs Tremayne said lovingly, "there was a
special point whereto God did desire to bring this maiden;--a point
whereat He oft-times aimeth in the training of His childre.  It is, to
be satisfied with His will.  Not only to submit thereto.  Thou mayest
submit unto all outward seeming, and yet be sore dissatisfied."

This is an atom: 
Was not this Blanche's position at that moment?

This is an atom: 
"But to be satisfied with His ordering--to receive it as the best thing,
dearer unto thee than thine own will and way; as the one thing which
thou wouldst have done, at the cost, if need be, of all other:--ah,
Blanche, 'tis no light nor easy thing, this!  And unto this God led her
of whom I have been telling thee.  He led her, till she could look up to
Him, and say, with a true, honest heart--`Father, lead where Thou wilt.
If in the dark, well: so Thou hold me, I am content I am Thine, body,
and soul, and spirit: it shall be well and blessed for me, if but Thy
will be done.'  And then, Blanche,--when she could look up and say this
in sincerity--then He laid down His rod, and gave all back into her
bosom."

This is an atom: 
Blanche drew a deep sigh,--partly of relief, but not altogether.

This is an atom: 
"You knew this maiden your own self, Mrs Tremayne?"

This is an atom: 
"Wouldst thou fain know whom the maid were, Blanche?  Her name was--
Thekla Rose."

This is an atom: 
"Mistress Tremayne!--yourself?"

This is an atom: 
"Myself, dear heart.  And I should not have gone back over this story
now, but that I thought it might serve thee to hear it.  I love not to
look back to that time, though it were to mine own good.  'Tis like an
ill wound which is healed, and thou hast no further suffering thereof:
yet the scar is there for evermore.  And yet, dear Blanche, if it were
given me to choose, now, whether I would have that dark and weary time
part of my life, or no--reckoning what I should have lost without it--I
would say once again, Ay.  They that know the sweetness of close walking
with God will rather grope, step by step, at His side through the
darkness, than walk smoothly in the full glare of the sun without Him:
and very street was my walk, when I had won back the felt holding of His
hand."

This is an atom: 
"But is He not with them in the sunlight?" asked Blanche shyly.

This is an atom: 
"He is alway with them, dear heart: but we see his light clearest when
other lights are out.  And we be so prone to walk further off in the
daylight!--we see so many things beside Him.  We would fain be running
off after birds and butterflies; fain be filling our hands with bright
flowers by the way: and we picture not rightly to ourselves that these
things are but to cheer us on as we step bravely forward, for there will
be flowers enough when we reach Home."

This is an atom: 
Blanche looked earnestly into the red embers, and was silent.

This is an atom: 
"Seest thou now, Blanche, what I meant in saying, I would not have thee
miss the gold?"

This is an atom: 
"I reckon you mean that God hath somewhat to give, better than what He
taketh away."

This is an atom: 
"Right, dear heart.  Ah, how much better!  Yet misconceive me not, my
child.  We do not buy Heaven with afflictions; never think that,
Blanche.  There be many that have made that blunder.  Nay! the beggar
buyeth not thy gold with his penny piece.  Christ hath bought Heaven for
His chosen: it is the purchase of His blood; and nothing else in all the
world could have paid for it.  But they that shall see His glory yonder,
must be fitted for it here below; and oft-times God employeth sorrows
and cares to this end.--And now, Blanche, canst answer thine own
question, and tell me what I think of thee?"

This is an atom: 
Blanche blushed scarlet.

This is an atom: 
"I am afeared," she said, hanging down her head, "you must think me but
a right silly child."

This is an atom: 
Mrs Tremayne stroked Blanche's hair, with a little laugh.

This is an atom: 
"I think nothing very ill of thee, dear child.  But I do think thou hast
made a blunder or twain."

This is an atom: 
"What be they?"  Blanche wished to know, more humbly than she would have
done that morning.

This is an atom: 
"Well, dear Blanche--firstly, I think thou hast mistaken fancy for love.
There be many that so do.  Many think they love another, when in truth
all they do love is themselves and their own pleasures, or the
flattering of their own vain conceits.  Ask thine own heart what thou
lovest in thy lover: is it him, or his liking for thyself?  If it be but
the latter, that is not love, Blanche.  'Tis but fancy, which is to love
as the waxen image to the living man.  Love would have him it loveth
bettered at her own cost: it would fain see him higher and nobler--I
mean not higher in men's eyes, but nearer Heaven and God--whatever were
the price to herself.  True love will go with us into Heaven, Blanche:
it can never die, nor be forgotten.  Remember the word of John the
Apostle, that `he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in
him.'  And wouldst thou dare to apply that holy and heavenly name unto
some vain fancy that shall be as though it had never been six months
thereafter?  My child, we men and women be verily guilty concerning this
matter.  We take the name of that which is the very essence of God, and
set it lightly on a thing of earth and time, the which shall perish in
the using.  Well, and there is another mistake, sweet, which I fear thou
mayest have made.  It may be thou art thinking wrongfully of thine
earthly father, as I did of my heavenly One.  He dealeth with thee
hardly, countest thou?  Well, it may be so; yet it is to save thee from
that which should be much harder.  Think no ill of the father who loveth
thee and would fain save thee.  And, O Blanche! howsoever He may deal
with thee, never, never do thou think hardly of that heavenly Father,
who loveth thee far dearer than he, and would save thee from far
bitterer woe."

This is an atom: 
Blanche had looked very awe-struck when Mrs Tremayne spoke so solemnly
of the real nature of love; and now she raised tearful eyes to her
friend's face.

This is an atom: 
"I thought none ill of my father, Mistress Tremayne.  I wis well he
loveth me."

This is an atom: 
"That is well, dear heart.  I am fain it should be so."

This is an atom: 
And there the subject dropped rather abruptly, as first Clare, and then
Arthur, came into the room.

This is an atom: 
Don Juan did not appear to: miss Blanche, after the first day.  When he
found that she and her father and sister were absent from the
supper-table, he looked round with some surprise and a little
perplexity; but he asked no question, and no one volunteered an
explanation.  He very soon found a new diversion, in the shape of
Lucrece, to whom he proceeded to address his flowery language with even
less sincerity than he had done to Blanche.  But no sooner did Sir
Thomas perceive this turn of affairs than he took the earliest
opportunity of sternly demanding of his troublesome prisoner "what he
meant?"

This is an atom: 
Don Juan professed entire ignorance of the purport of this question.
Sir Thomas angrily explained.

This is an atom: 
"Nay, Senor, what would you?" inquired the young Spaniard, with an air
of injured innocence.  "An Andalusian gentleman, wheresoever he may be,
and in what conditions, must always show respect to the ladies."

This is an atom: 
"Respect!" cried the enraged squire.  "Do Spanish gentlemen call such
manner of talk showing respect?  Thank Heaven that I was born in
England!  Sir, when an English gentleman carries himself toward a young
maiden as you have done, he either designs to win her in honourable
wedlock, or he is a villain.  Which are you?"

This is an atom: 
"If we were in Spain, Senor," answered Don Juan, fire flashing from his
dark eyes, "you would answer those words with your sword.  But since I
am your prisoner, and have no such remedy, I must be content with a
reply in speech.  The customs of your land are different from ours.  I
will even condescend to say that I am, and for divers years have so
been, affianced to a lady of mine own country.  Towards the _senoritas_
your daughters, I have shown but common courtesy, as it is understood in
Spain."

This is an atom: 
In saying which, Don Juan stated what was delicately termed by Swift's
Houynhnms, "the thing which is not."  Of what consequence was it in his
eyes, when the Council of Constance had definitively decreed that "no
faith was to be kept with heretics"?

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas Enville was less given to the use of profane language than
most gentlemen of his day, but in answer to this speech he swore
roundly, and--though a staunch Protestant--thanked all the saints and
angels that he never was in Spain, and, the Queen's Highness' commands
excepted, never would be.  As to his daughters, he would prefer turning
them all into Nebuchadnezzar's fiery furnace to allowing one of them to
set foot on the soil of that highly objectionable country.  These
sentiments were couched in the most peppery language of which the
Squire's lips were well capable; and having thus delivered himself, he
turned on his heel and left Don Juan to his own meditations.

This is an atom: 
That _caballero_ speedily discovered that he had addressed his last
compliment to any of the young ladies at Enville Court.  Henceforward he
only saw them at meals, and then he found himself, much to his
discomfiture, placed between Jack and Mistress Rachel.  To pay delicate
attentions to the latter was sheer waste of frankincense: yet it was so
much in his nature, when speaking to a woman, that he began to tell her
that she talked like an angel.  Mistress Rachel looked him full in the
face.

This is an atom: 
"Don John," said she, in the most unmoved manner, "if I believed you
true, I should call on my brother to put you forth of the hall.  As I
believe you false, I do it not."

This is an atom: 
After that day, Don Juan directed all his conversation to Jack.

This is an atom: 
He was not very sorry to leave Enville Court, which had become no longer
an amusing, but an uncomfortable place.  In his eyes, it was perfectly
monstrous that any man should object to his daughters being honoured by
the condescending notice of an Andalusian gentleman, who would one day
be a grandee of the first class; utterly preposterous!  But since this
unreasonable man was so absurd as to object to the distinction,
conferred upon his house, it was as well that an Andalusian gentleman
should be out of his sphere.  So Don Juan went willingly to London.
Friends of his parents made suit for him, and Elizabeth herself
remembered his mother, as one who had done her several little
kindnesses, such as a Lady-in-Waiting on the Queen could do for a
Princess under a cloud; and Don Juan received a free pardon, and leave
to return home when and as he would.  He only broke one more heart while
he remained in England; and that was beneath any regret on his part,
being only a poor, insignificant grocer's daughter.  And then he sailed
for Spain; and then he married Dona Lisarda; and then he became a
Lord-in-Waiting; and then he lived a wealthy, gorgeous, prosperous life;
and then all men spoke well of him, seeing how much good he had done to
himself; and then he grew old,--a highly respected, highly
self-satisfied man.

This is an atom: 
And then his soul was required of him.  Did God say to him,--"Thou
fool"?

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER NINE.

This is an atom: 
TOO ABSTRUSE FOR BLANCHE.

This is an atom: 
"Hear the just law, the judgment of the skies!
  He that hates truth shall be the dupe of lies;
  And he that _will_ be cheated to the last,
  Delusions strong as Hell shall bind him fast."

This is an atom: 
_Cowper_.

This is an atom: 
"I did conceive, Mistress Blanche," said Mr Tremayne one morning, as
the party rose from the breakfast-table, "that you would with a good
will see the picture of Clare's grandsire, the which hangeth in my
study-chamber?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh ay, an' it like you," responded Blanche eagerly.

This is an atom: 
Clare had seen the portrait, but not Blanche.  Mr Tremayne led the way
to his study, allowed her to examine the likeness at her leisure, and
answered all her questions about John Avery.  Entrapped Blanche did not
realise that he was catching her with the same sort of guile which Saint
Paul used towards the Corinthians.  [2 Corinthians 12, 16] Mrs Tremayne
came in, and sat down quietly with her work, before the inspection was
over.  When her curiosity was at length satisfied, Blanche thanked Mr
Tremayne, and would have left the room with a courtesy: but such was by
no means the intention of her pastor.

This is an atom: 
"I have heard, say, Mistress Blanche," said he quietly, "that your mind
hath been somewhat unsettled touching the difference, or the lack of
difference, betwixt us and the Papists.  If so be, pray you sit down,
and give us leave to talk the same over."

This is an atom: 
Blanche felt caught at last.  It must be Sir Thomas, of course, who had
told the Rector, for there was no one else who could have done it.  And
it may be added, though Blanche did not know it, that her father had
specially begged Mr Tremayne to examine into the matter, and to set
Blanche right on any points whereon she might have gone wrong.

This is an atom: 
Thus brought to a stand and forced to action, it was Blanche's nature to
behave after the manner of a mule in the same predicament, and to affect
stronger contrary convictions than she really felt.  It was true, she
said rather bluntly: she did think there was very little, if any,
difference between many doctrines held by the rival Churches.

This is an atom: 
"There is all the difference that is betwixt Heaven and earth," answered
Mr Tremayne.  "Nay, I had well-nigh said, betwixt Heaven and Hell: for
I do believe the Devil to have been the perverter of truth with those
corruptions that are in Papistry.  But I pray you, of your gentleness,
to tell me of one matter wherein, as you account, no difference lieth?"

This is an atom: 
With what power of intellect she had--which was not much--Blanche
mentally ran over the list, and selected the item on which she thought
Mr Tremayne would find least to say.

This is an atom: 
"It seemeth me you be too rude [harsh, severe] to charge the Papists
with idolatry," she said.  "They be no more idolaters than we."

This is an atom: 
"No be they?  How so, I pray you?"

This is an atom: 
"Why, the images in their churches be but for the teaching of such as
cannot read, nor do they any worship unto the image, but only unto him
that is signified thereby.  Moreover, they pray not unto the saints, as
you would have it; they do but ask the saints' prayers for them.  Surely
I may ask my father to pray for me, and you would not say that I prayed
unto him!"

This is an atom: 
"I pray you, pull bridle there, Mistress Blanche," said Mr Tremayne,
smiling; "for you have raised already four weighty points, the which may
not be expounded in a moment.  I take them, an' it like you, not justly
in your order, but rather in the order wherein they do affect each
other.  And first, under your good pleasure,--what is prayer?"

This is an atom: 
Blanche was about to reply at once, when it struck her that the question
involved more than she supposed.  She would have answered,--"Why, saying
my prayers:" but the idea came to her, _Was_ that prayer?  And she felt
instinctively that, necessarily, it was not.  She thought a moment, and
then answered slowly;--

This is an atom: 
"I would say that it is to ask somewhat with full desire to obtain the
same."

This is an atom: 
"Is that all?" replied Mr Tremayne.

This is an atom: 
Blanche thought so.

This is an atom: 
"Methinks there is more therein than so.  For it implieth, beyond this,
full belief that he whom you shall ask,--firstly, can hear you;
secondly, is able to grant you; thirdly, is willing to grant you."

This is an atom: 
"Surely the saints be willing to pray for us!"

This is an atom: 
"How know you they can hear us?"

This is an atom: 
Blanche thought, and thought, and could find no reason for supposing it.

This is an atom: 
"Again, how know you they can grant us?"

This is an atom: 
"But they pray!"

This is an atom: 
"They praise, and they hold communion: I know not whether they offer
petitions or no."

This is an atom: 
Blanche sat meditating.

This is an atom: 
"You see, therefore, there is no certainty on the first and most weighty
of all these points.  We know not that any saint can hear us.  But pass
that--grant, for our talk's sake, that they have knowledge of what
passeth on earth, and can hear when we do speak to them.  How then?
Here is Saint Mary, our Lord's mother, sitting in Heaven; and upon earth
there be petitions a-coming up unto her, at one time, from Loretto in
Italy, and from Nuremburg in Germany, and from Seville in Spain, and
from Bruges in Flanders, and from Paris in France, and from Bideford in
Devon, and from Kirkham in Lancashire.  Mistress Blanche, if she can
hear and make distinction betwixt all these at the self-same moment,
then is she no woman like to you.  Your brain should be mazed with the
din, and spent with the labour.  Invocation declareth omnipotency.  And
there is none almighty save One,--that is, God."

This is an atom: 
"But," urged Blanche, "the body may be one whither, and the spirit
another.  And Saint Mary is a spirit."

This is an atom: 
"Truly so.  Yet the spirit can scantly be in ten places at one time--how
much less a thousand?"

This is an atom: 
Blanche was silent.

This is an atom: 
"The next thing, I take it, is that they pray not unto the saints, but
do ask the saints only to pray for them.  If the saints hear them not,
the one is as futile as the other.  But I deny that they do not pray
unto the saints."

This is an atom: 
Mr Tremayne went to his bookcase, and came back with a volume in his
hand.

This is an atom: 
"Listen here, I pray you--`Blessed Virgin, Mother of God, and after Him
mine only hope, pray for me, and guard me during this night'--`Give me
power to fight against thine enemies'--`Great God, who by the
resurrection of Thy Son Jesus Christ hast rejoiced the world, we pray
Thee, grant that by His blessed mother the Virgin Mary we may obtain the
bliss of eternal life'--`Make mine heart to burn with love for Jesus
Christ,--make me to feel the death of Jesus Christ in mine heart,--cause
to be given unto us the joys of Paradise--O Jesu!  O Mary! cause me to
be truly troubled for my sins.'  These, Mistress Blanche, be from the
book that is the Common Prayer of the Papistical Church: and all these
words be spoken unto Mary.  As you well see, I cast no doubt, they do
ascribe unto her divinity.  For none can effectually work upon man's
heart--save the Holy Ghost only.  None other can cause his heart to be
`truly troubled for sin;' none other can make his heart to burn.  Now
what think you of this, Mistress Blanche?  Is it praying unto the
saints, or no?"

This is an atom: 
What Blanche thought, she did not say; but if it could be guessed from
the expression of her face, she was both shocked and astonished.

This is an atom: 
"Now come we to the third point: to wit, that images be as pictures for
the teaching of such as have no learning.  Methinks, Mistress Blanche,
that God is like to be wiser than all men.  There must needs have been
many Israelites in the wilderness that had no learning: yet His command
unto them, as unto us, is, `Ye shall not make unto you _any_ graven
image.'  I take it that the small good that might thereby be done
(supposing any such to be) should be utterly overborne of the companying
evil.  Moreover, when you do learn the vulgar, you would, I hope, learn
them that which is true.  Is it true, I pray you, that Mary was borne
into Heaven of angels, like as Christ did Himself ascend?--or that being
thus carried thither, she was crowned of God, as a queen?  Dear maid, we
have the Master's word touching all such, pourtrayments.  `The graven
images of _their_ gods shall ye burn with fire.--Thou shalt utterly
detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a cursed thing.'"
[Deuteronomy twelve, verses 25, 26.]

This is an atom: 
"O Mr Tremayne!" said Blanche, with a horrified look.  "You would
surely ne'er call a picture or an image of our Lord's own mother a thing
accursed?"

This is an atom: 
"But I would, my maid," he answered very gravely, "that instant moment
that there should be given thereunto the honour and worship and glory
that be only due to Him.  `My glory will I not give to another, neither
My praise to graven images.'  Nay, I would call an image of Christ
Himself a thing accursed, if it stood in His place in the hearts of men.
Mark you, King Hezekiah utterly destroyed the serpent of brass that was
God's own appointed likeness of Christ, that moment that the children of
Israel did begin to burn incense unto it, thereby making it an idol."

This is an atom: 
"But in the Papistical Church they be no idols, Master Tremayne!"
interposed Blanche eagerly.  "Therein lieth the difference betwixt
Popery and Paganism."

This is an atom: 
"What should you say, Mistress Blanche, if you wist that therein lieth
_no_ difference betwixt Popery and Paganism?  The old Pagans were wont
to say the same thing.  [Note 1.] They should have laughed in your face
if you had charged them with worshipping wood and stone, and have
answered that they worshipped only the thing signified.  So much is it
thus, that amongst some Pagan nations, they do hold that their god
cometh down in his proper person into the image for a season (like as
the Papists into the wafer of the sacrament), and when they account him
gone, they cast the image away as no more worth.  Yet hark you how God
Himself accounteth of this their worship.  `He maketh a god, even his
graven image: he falleth down unto IT, and worshippeth IT, and prayeth
unto IT, and saith, Deliver me, for thou art my god.'  And list also how
He expoundeth the same:--`A deceived heart hath turned him aside, that
he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right
hand?'  [Isaiah 44, verses 17, 20.] There should be little idolatry in
this world if there were no deceived hearts."

This is an atom: 
Blanche twisted her handkerchief about, in the manner of a person who is
determined not to be convinced, yet can find nothing to say in answer.

This is an atom: 
"Tell me, Mistress Blanche,--for I think too well of your good sense to
doubt the same,--you cannot believe that Christ Himself is in a piece of
bread?"

This is an atom: 
In her inmost heart she certainly believed no such thing.  But it would
never do to retreat from her position.  In Blanche's eyes, disgrace lay
not in being mistaken, but in being shown the mistake.

This is an atom: 
"Wherefore may it not be so?" she murmured.  "'Tis matter of faith, in
like manner as is our Lord's resurrection."

This is an atom: 
"In like manner?  I cry you mercy.  You believe the resurrection on the
witness of them that knew it--that saw the sepulchre void; that saw
Christ, and spake with Him, and did eat and drink with Him, and knew Him
to be the very same Jesus that had died.  You can bear no witness either
way, for you were not there.  But in this matter of the bread, here are
you; and you see it for yourself not to be as you be told.  Your eyes
tell you that they behold bread; your hands tell you that they handle
bread; your tongue tells you that it tasteth bread.  The witness of your
senses is in question: and these three do agree that the matter is bread
only."

This is an atom: 
"The senses may be deceived, I reckon?"

This is an atom: 
"The senses may be deceived; and, as meseemeth, after two fashions:
firstly, when the senses themselves be not in full healthfulness and
vigour.  Thus, if a man have some malady in his eyes, that he know
himself to see things mistakenly, from the relation of other around him,
then may he doubt what his eyes see with regard to this matter.
Secondly, a man must not lean on his senses touching matters that come
not within the discerning of sense.  Now in regard to this bread, the
Papists do overreach themselves.  Did they but tell us that the change
made was mystical and of faith,--not within the discernment of sense--we
might then find it harder work to deal withal, and we must seek unto the
Word of God only, and not unto our sense in any wise.  But they go
farther: they tell us the change is such, that there is _no more the
substance of bread left at all_.  [Note 2.] This therefore is matter
within the discerning of sense.  If it be thus, then this change is
needs one that I can see, can taste, can handle.  I know, at my own
table, whether I eat flesh or bread; how then should I be unable to know
the same at the table of the Lord?  Make it matter of sense, and I must
needs submit it to the judgment of my senses.  But now to take the other
matter,--to wit, of faith.  Christ said unto the Jews, `The bread which
I will give is My flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.'
They took Him right as the Papists do.  They `strave among themselves,
saying, How shall this man give us his flesh to eat?'  Now mark you our
Lord's answer.  Doth He say, `Ye do ill to question this matter; 'tis a
mystery of the Church; try it not by sense, but believe?'  Nay, He
openeth the door somewhat wider, and letteth in another ray of light
upon the signification of His words.  He saith to them,--`Except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His blood, ye have _no life_ in
you.'  I pray you, what manner of life?  Surely not the common life of
nature, for that may be sustained by other food.  The life, then, is a
spiritual life; and how shall spiritual life be sustained by natural
meat?  The meat must be spiritual, if the life be so.  Again He
saith,--`He that eateth My flesh, and drinketh My blood, dwelleth in Me,
and I in him.'  Now, if the eating be after a literal manner, so also
must be the dwelling.  Our bodies, therefore, must be withinside the
body of Christ in Heaven, and His body must be withinside every one of
ours on earth.  That this is impossible and ridiculous alike, I need not
to tell you.  Mistress Blanche, faith is not to believe whatsoever any
shall tell you.  It is less to believe a thing than to trust a man.  And
I can only trust a man on due testimony that he is worthy trust."

This is an atom: 
"But this is to trust Christ our Lord," said Blanche.

This is an atom: 
"Ay so, my maid?  Or is it rather to trust our own fantasy of what
Christ would say?"

This is an atom: 
Blanche was silent for a moment; then she answered,--"But He did say,
`This is My body.'"

This is an atom: 
"Will you go further, an' it like you?"

This is an atom: 
"How, Master Tremayne?"

This is an atom: 
"`This is My body, which is broken for you.'  Was the bread that He held
in His hand the body that was broken?  Did that morsel of bread take
away the sin of the world?  Look you, right in so far as the bread was
the body, in so far also was the breaking of that bread the death of
that body,--and no further.  Now, Mistress Blanche, was the breaking of
the bread the death of the body?  Think thereon, and answer me."

This is an atom: 
"It was an emblem or representation thereof, no doubt," she said slowly.

This is an atom: 
"Good.  Then, inasmuch as the breaking did set forth the death, in so
much did the bread set forth the body.  If the one be an emblem, so must
be the other."

This is an atom: 
"That may be, perchance," said Blanche, sheering off from the subject,
as she found it passing beyond her, and requiring the troublesome effort
of thought: "but, Master Tremayne, there is one other matter whereon the
speech of you Gospellers verily offendeth me no little."

This is an atom: 
"Pray you, tell me what it is, Mistress Blanche."

This is an atom: 
"It is the little honour, or I might well say the dishonour, that you do
put upon Saint Mary the blessed Virgin.  Surely, of all that He knew and
loved on this earth, she must have been the dearest unto our Lord.  Why
then thus scrimp and scant the reverence due unto her?  Verily, in this
matter, the Papists do more meetly than you."

This is an atom: 
"`More meetly'--wherewith, Mistress Blanche?  With the truth of Holy
Scripture, or with the fantasies of human nature?"

This is an atom: 
"I would say," repeated Blanche rather warmly, "that her honour must be
very dear to her blessed Son."

This is an atom: 
"There is one honour ten thousand-fold dearer unto His heart, my maid,
and that is the honour of God His eternal Father.  All honour, that
toucheth not this, I am ready to pay to her.  But tell me wherefore you
think she must be His dearest?"

This is an atom: 
"Because it must needs be thus," replied illogical Blanche.

This is an atom: 
"I would ask you to remember, Mistress Blanche, that He hath told us the
clean contrary."

This is an atom: 
Blanche looked up with an astonished expression.

This is an atom: 
"`Whosoever shall do the will of My Father which is in Heaven, the same
is My brother, and sister, and mother.'  Equally honourable, equally
dear, with that mother of His flesh whom you would fain upraise above
all other women.  And I am likewise disposed to think that word of
Paul,--`Yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now
henceforth know we Him no more'--I say, I am disposed to think this may
have his reverse side.  Though He hath known us after the flesh, yet
thus, now that He is exalted to the right hand of God, He knoweth us no
more.  And if so, then Mary is now unto Him but one of a multitude of
saved souls, all equally fair and dear and precious in the eyes of Him
that died for them."

This is an atom: 
"O Master Tremayne!"

This is an atom: 
"What would you say, Mistress Blanche?"

This is an atom: 
"That is truly--it sounds so cold!" said Blanche, disparagingly.

This is an atom: 
"Doth it so?" asked the Rector, smiling.  "Cold, that all should be
beloved of His heart?  Dear maid, 'tis not that He loveth her the less,
but that He loveth the other more."

This is an atom: 
As Blanche made no response, Mr Tremayne went on.

This is an atom: 
"There is another side to this matter, Mistress Blanche, that I daresay
you have ne'er looked upon: and it toucheth at once the matter of
images, and the reverence due unto Saint Mary.  Know you that great part
of the images held in worship for her by the Papists, be no images of
her at all?  All the most ancient--and many be very ancient--were ne'er
made for Mary.  The marvel-working black Virgins--our Lady of
Einsiedeln, our Lady of Loretto, and all such--be in very truth old
idols, of a certain Tuscan or Etruscan goddess, elder than the days of
the Romans.  [Note 3.] Again, all they that are of fair complexion--such
as have grey eyes [blue eyes were then called grey] and yellow hair--
these be not Mary the Jewess.  We can cast no doubt she was dark.
Whence then come all these fair-complexioned pictures?  We might take
it, in all likelihood, from the fancy of the painters, that did account
a fair woman to be of better favour than a dark.  But search you into
past history, and you shall find it not thus.  These fair-favoured
pictures be all of another than Mary; to wit, of that ancient goddess,
in her original of the Babylonians, that was worshipped under divers
names all over the world,--in Egypt as Isis; in Greece, as Athene,
Artemis, and Aphrodite; in Rome as Juno, Diana, and Venus: truly, every
goddess was but a diversity of this one.  [Note 4.] These, then, be no
pictures of the Maid of Nazareth.  And 'tis the like of other images,--
they be christened idols.  The famed Saint Peter, in his church at Rome
is but a christened Jupiter.  Wit you how Paganism was got rid of?  It
was by receiving of it into the very bosom of the Roman Church.  The
ceremonies of the Pagans were but turned,--from Ceres, Cybele, Isis, or
Aphrodite, unto Mary--from Apollo, Bacchus, Osiris, Tammuz, unto Christ.
Thus, when these Pagans found that they did in very deed worship the
same god, and with the same observances, as of old--for the change was
in nothing save the name only--they became Christians by handfuls;--yea,
by cityfuls.  What marvel, I pray you?  But how shall we call this
Church of Rome, that thus bewrayed her trust, and sold her Lord again
like Judas?  An idolatrous Christianity--nay, rather a baptised
idolatry!  God hath writ her name, Mistress Blanche, on the last page of
His Word; and it is, Babylon, Mother of all Abominations."

This is an atom: 
"I do marvel, Master Tremayne," said Blanche a little indignantly,
though in a constrained voice, "how you dare bring such ill charges
against the Papistical Church.  Do they not set great store by holiness,
I pray you?  Yea, have they not monks and nuns, and a celibate
priesthood, consecrate to greater holiness than other?  How can you
charge them with wickedness and abomination?"

This is an atom: 
"Poor child!" murmured the Rector, as if to himself,--"she little wist
what manner of life idolaters term holiness!  Mistress Blanche, yonder
cloak of professed holiness hideth worser matter than you can so much as
think on.  'Tis not I that set that name on the Papistical Church.  It
was God Himself.  Will you tell me, moreover, an' it like you,--What is
holiness?"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness--right-doing."

This is an atom: 
"Those be unclear words, methinks.  They may mean well-nigh aught.  For
me, I would say, Holiness is walking with God, and according to the will
of God."

This is an atom: 
"Well!  Is not God pleased with the doing of good?"

This is an atom: 
"God is pleased with nothing but Christ.  He is not pleased with you
because of your deeds.  He must first accept _you_, and that not for any
your deserving, but for the sake of the alone merits of His Son; and
then He shall be pleased with your deeds, since they shall be such as
His Spirit shall work in you.  But nothing can please God except that
which cometh from God.  Your works, apart from Him, be dead works.  And
you cannot serve the living God with dead works."

This is an atom: 
Blanche's half-unconscious shrug of the shoulders conveyed the
information that this doctrine was not agreeable to her.

This is an atom: 
"Surely God will be pleased with us if we do out best!" she muttered.

This is an atom: 
"By no means," said Mr Tremayne quietly.  "Your best is not good enough
for God.  He likeneth that best of yours to filthy rags.  What should
you say to one that brought you a present of filthy rags, so foul that
you could not so much as touch them?"

This is an atom: 
Blanche, who was extremely dainty as to what she touched, quite
appreciated this simile.  She found an answer, nevertheless.

This is an atom: 
"God is merciful, Mr Tremayne.  You picture Him as hard and unpitiful."

This is an atom: 
"Verily, Mistress Blanche, God is merciful: more than you nor I may
conceive.  But God hath no mercies outside of Christ.  Come to Him
bringing aught in your hand save Christ, and He hath nought to say to
you.  And be you ware that you cannot come and bring nothing.  If you
bring not Christ, assuredly you shall bring somewhat else,--your own
works, or your own sufferings, or in some manner your own deservings.
And for him that cometh with his own demerits in hand, God hath nought
saving the one thing he hath indeed demerited,--which is--Hell."

This is an atom: 
Mr Tremayne spoke so solemnly that Blanche felt awed.  But she did not
relish the doctrine which he preached any better on that account.

This is an atom: 
"How have I demerited that?" she asked.

This is an atom: 
"God Himself shall answer you.  `He that hath not the Son of God hath
not life.'  `He that believeth not is condemned already.'"

This is an atom: 
"But I do believe--all Christians believe!" urged Blanche.

This is an atom: 
"What believe you?"

This is an atom: 
"I believe unfeignedly all that the creed saith touching our Lord."

This is an atom: 
"And I believe as unfeignedly all that the Commentaries of Caesar say
touching that same Julius Caesar."

This is an atom: 
"What mean you, Master Tremayne?"

This is an atom: 
"What did Julius Caesar for me, Mistress Blanche?"

This is an atom: 
"Marry, nought at all," said Blanche, laughing, "without his invading of
England should have procured unto us some civility which else we had
lacked."

This is an atom: 
Civility, at that time, meant civilisation.  When, according to the
wondrous dreamer of Bedford Gaol, Mr Worldly Wiseman referred
Christian, if he should not find Mr Legality at home, to the pretty
young man called Civility, whom he had to his son, and who could take
off a burden as well as the old gentleman himself,--he meant, not what
we call civility, but what we call civilisation.  That pretty young man
is at present the most popular physician of the day; and he still goes
to the town of Morality to church.  The road to his house is crowded
more than ever, though the warning has been standing for two hundred
years, that "notwithstanding his simpering looks, he is but a
hypocrite,"--as well as another warning far older,--"Behold, the fear of
the Lord, that is wisdom."  [Job twenty-eight verse 28.]

This is an atom: 
"But now," said the Rector, with an answering smile, "tell me, what did
Jesus Christ for me?"

This is an atom: 
"He is the Saviour," she said in a low voice.

This is an atom: 
"Of whom, dear maid?"

This is an atom: 
Blanche felt rather vague on that point, and the feeling was combined
with a conviction that she ought not to be so.  She tried to give an
answer which could not be contradicted.

This is an atom: 
"Of them that believe."

This is an atom: 
"Certes," said Mr Tremayne, suppressing a smile, for he saw both
Blanche's difficulty and her attempt to evade it.  "But that, look you,
landeth us on the self place where we were at aforetime: who be they
that believe?"

This is an atom: 
Blanche wisely determined to commit herself no further.

This is an atom: 
"Would it please you to tell me, Sir?"

This is an atom: 
"Dear child, if you heard me to say, touching some man that we both were
acquaint withal,--`I believe in John'--what should you conceive that I
did signify?"

This is an atom: 
"I would account," said Blanche readily, thinking this question easy to
answer, "that you did mean, `I account of him as a true man; I trust
him; I hold him well worthy of affiance.'"

This is an atom: 
"Good.  And if, after thus saying, you should see me loth to trust an
half-angel into his hands to spend for me,--should you think that mine
act did go with my words, or no?"

This is an atom: 
"Assuredly, nay."

This is an atom: 
"Then look you, Mistress Blanche, that it is greater matter than you
maybe made account, when a man shall say, `I believe in Jesus Christ.'
For it signifieth not only that I believe He was born, and lived, and
suffered, and arose, and ascended.  Nay, but it is, I account of Him as
a true man; I trust Him, with body and soul, with friends and goods: I
hold Him worthy of all affiance, and I will hold back nothing, neither
myself nor my having, from His keeping and disposing.  (Ah, my maid!
which of us can say so much as this, at all times, and of all matters?)
But above all, in the relation whereof we have spoken, it is to say, I
trust Christ with my soul.  I lean it wholly upon Him.  I have no hope
in myself; He is mine hope.  I have no righteousness of myself; He is my
righteousness.  I have no standing before God,--I demerit nought but
hell; but Christ standeth before God for me: His blood hath washed me
clean from all sin, and His pleading with God availeth to hold me up in
His ways.  And unless or until you can from your heart thus speak I pray
you say not again that you believe in Jesus Christ."

This is an atom: 
"But, Master, every man cannot thus believe."

This is an atom: 
"No man can thus believe until God have taught him."

This is an atom: 
Blanche thought, but was not bold enough to say, that she did not see
why anybody should believe such disagreeable things about himself.  She
did not feel this low opinion of her own merits.  Hers was the natural
religion of professing Christians--that she must do the best she could,
and Christ would make up the remainder.  Mr Tremayne knew what was
passing in her mind as well as if she had spoken it.

This is an atom: 
"You think that is hard?" said he.

This is an atom: 
"_I_ think it--Mr Tremayne, I could not thus account of myself."

This is an atom: 
"You could not, dear maid.  I am assured of that."

This is an atom: 
"Then wherein lieth my fault?" demanded Blanche.

This is an atom: 
"In that you will not."

This is an atom: 
Blanche felt stung; and she spoke out now, with one of those bursts of
confidence which came from her now and then.

This is an atom: 
"That is sooth, Master.  I will not.  I have not committed such sins as
have many men and women.  I ne'er stole, nor murdered, nor used profane
swearing, nor worshipped idols, nor did many another ill matter: and I
cannot believe but that God shall be more merciful to such than to the
evil fawtors [factors, doers] that be in the world.  Where were His
justice, if no?"

This is an atom: 
"Mistress Blanche, you wit neither what is God, neither what is sin.
The pure and holy law of God is like to a golden ring.  You account,
that because you have not broken it on this side, nor on that side, you
have not broken it at all.  But if you break it on any side, it is
broken; and you it is that have broken it."

This is an atom: 
"Wherein have I broken it?" she asked defiantly.

This is an atom: 
"`All unrighteousness is sin.'  Have you alway done rightly, all your
life long?  If not, then you are a sinner."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, of course, we be all sinners," said Blanche, as if that were a very
slight admission.

This is an atom: 
"Good.  And a sinner is a condemned criminal.  He is not come into this
world to see if he may perchance do well, and stand: he is already
fallen; he is already under condemnation of law."

This is an atom: 
"Then 'tis even as I said,--there is no fault in any of us," maintained
Blanche, sturdily clinging to her point.

This is an atom: 
"`This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.'"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, Master Tremayne, you be now too hard on me.  I love not darkness
rather than light."

This is an atom: 
"God saith you so do, dear maid.  And He knoweth--ay, better than
yourself.  But look not only on that side of the matter.  If a man
believe that and no more, 'tis fit to drive him unto desperation.  Look
up unto the writing which is over the gate into God's narrow way--the
gate and the way likewise being His Son Jesus Christ--and read His
message of peace sent unto these sinners.  `Whosoever will, let him take
the water of life freely.'  It is God's ordering, that whosoever _will_,
he can."

This is an atom: 
"You said but this last Sunday, Master Tremayne, that 'twas not possible
for any man to come to Christ without God did draw him thereto."

This is an atom: 
"_I_ said, my maid?  My Master it was which said that.  Well--what so?"

This is an atom: 
"Then we can have nought to answer for; for without God do draw us, we
cannot come."

This is an atom: 
"And without we be willing to be thus drawn, God will not do it."

This is an atom: 
"Nay, but you said, moreover, that the very will must come from God."

This is an atom: 
"Therein I spake truth."

This is an atom: 
Blanche thought she had now driven her pastor into a corner.

This is an atom: 
"Then you do allow," she asked triumphantly, "that if I should not will
the same, I am clean of all fault, sith the very will must needs come
from God?"

This is an atom: 
Mr Tremayne understood the drift of his catechumen.

This is an atom: 
"An' it like you, Mistress Blanche, we will leave a moment to make
inquiry into that point, till we shall have settled another, of more
import to you and me."

This is an atom: 
"What is it, Master?"

This is an atom: 
"Are you willing?"

This is an atom: 
"Willing that I should be saved eternally?  Most assuredly."

This is an atom: 
"Then--willing that all the will of God shall be done, in you and by
you?"

This is an atom: 
"The one followeth not the other."

This is an atom: 
"I cry you mercy.  The King of kings, like other princes, dealeth with
His rebels on his own terms."

This is an atom: 
Blanche was silent, and, very uncomfortable.

This is an atom: 
"'Tis time for me to be about my duties.  When you shall have fully
settled that point of your willingness, Mistress Blanche, and shall have
determined that you are thus willing--which God grant!--then, an' it
like you, we will go into the other matter."

This is an atom: 
And Mr Tremayne left the room with a bow, very well knowing that as
soon as the first point was satisfactorily settled, the second would be
left quiescent.

This is an atom: 
Mrs Tremayne had never opened her lips; and leaving her in the study,
Blanche wandered into the parlour, where Clare and Lysken were seated at
work.

This is an atom: 
"I marvel what Master Tremayne would have!" said Blanche, sitting down
in the window, and idly pulling the dead leaves from the plant which
stood there.  "He saith 'tis our own fault that we will not to be saved,
and yet in the self breath he addeth that the will so to be must needs
be given us of God."

This is an atom: 
Lysken looked up.

This is an atom: 
"Methinks we are all willing enow to be saved from punishment," she
said.  "What we be unwilling to be saved from is sin."

This is an atom: 
"`Sin'--alway sin!" muttered Blanche.  "Ye be both of a story.  Sin is
wickedness.  I am not wicked."

This is an atom: 
"Sin is the disobeying of God," replied Lysken.  "And saving thy
presence, Blanche, thou art wicked."

This is an atom: 
"Then so art thou!" retorted Blanche.

This is an atom: 
"So I am," said Lysken.  "But I am willing to be saved therefrom."

This is an atom: 
"Prithee, Mistress Elizabeth Barnevelt, from what sin am I not willing
to be saved?"

This is an atom: 
"Dost truly wish to know?" asked Lysken in her coolest manner.

This is an atom: 
"Certes!"

This is an atom: 
"Then--pride."

This is an atom: 
"Pride is no sin!"

This is an atom: 
"I love not gainsaying, Blanche.  But I dare in no wise gainsay the
Lord.  And He saith of pride, that it is an abomination unto Him, and He
hateth it."  [Proverbs six, verse 16; and sixteen verse 5.]

This is an atom: 
"But that is ill and sinful pride," urged Blanche.  "There is proper
pride."

This is an atom: 
"It seemeth to my poor wits," said Lysken, "that a thing which the Lord
hateth must be all of it improper."

This is an atom: 
"Why, Lysken!  Thus saying, thou shouldst condemn all high spirit and
noble bearing!"

This is an atom: 
"`Blessed are the poor in spirit.'  There was no pride in Christ,
Blanche.  And thou wilt scarce say that He bare Him not nobly."

This is an atom: 
"Why, then, we might as well all be peasants!"

This is an atom: 
"I suppose we might, if we were," said Lysken.

This is an atom: 
"Lysken, it should be a right strange world, where thou hadst the
governance!"

This is an atom: 
"Very like," was Lysken's calm rejoinder, as she set the pin a little
further in her seam.

This is an atom: 
"What good is it, prithee, to set thee up against all men's opinion?
[What are now termed `views' were then called `opinions.'] Thou shalt
but win scorn for thine."

This is an atom: 
"Were it only mine, Blanche, it should be to no good.  But when it is
God's command wherewith mine opinion runneth,--why then, the good shall
be to hear Christ say, `Well done, faithful servant.'  The scorn I bare
here shall be light weight then."

This is an atom: 
"But wherefore not go smoothly through the world?"

This is an atom: 
"Because it should cost too much."

This is an atom: 
"Nay, what now?" remonstrated Blanche.

This is an atom: 
"I have two lives, Blanche: and I cannot have my best things in both.
The one is short and passing; the other is unchangeable, and shall stand
for ever.  Now then, I would like my treasures for the second of these
two lives: and if I miss any good thing in the first, it shall be no
great matter."

This is an atom: 
"Thou art a right Puritan!" said Blanche disgustedly.

This is an atom: 
"Call not names, Blanche," gently interposed Clare.

This is an atom: 
"Dear Clare, it makes he difference," said Lysken.  "If any call me a
Papist, 'twill not make me one."

This is an atom: 
"Lysken Barnevelt, is there aught in this world would move thee?"

This is an atom: 
"`In this world?'  Well, but little, methinks.  But--there will be some
things in the other."

This is an atom: 
"What things?" bluntly demanded Blanche.

This is an atom: 
"To see His Face!" said Lysken, the light breaking over her own.  "And
to hear Him say, `Come!'  And to sit down at the marriage-supper of the
Lamb,--with the outer door closed for ever, and the woes, and the
wolves, and the winter, all left on the outside.  If none of these
earthly things move me, Blanche, it is because those heavenly things
will."

This is an atom: 
And after that, Blanche was silent.

This is an atom: 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an atom: 
Note 1.  The Gentiles (saith Saint Augustine), which seem to be of the
purer religion, say, We worship not the images, but by the corporal
image we do behold the signs of the things which we ought to worship.
And Lactantius saith, The Gentiles say, We fear not the images, but them
after whose likeness the images be made, and to whose names they be
consecrated.  And Clemens saith, That serpent the Devil uttereth these
words by the mouth of certain men: We, to the honour of the invisible
God, worship visible images.--(Third Part of the Homily on Peril of
Idolatry: references in margin to Augustine Ps. 135; Lactantius l. 2.
Inst.; Clem., L.  S ad Jacob.)  Here are the "Fathers" condemning as
Pagan the reasoning of modern Papists.

This is an atom: 
Note 2.  "Credit et defendit que in eucharistia sive altaris sacramento
verum et naturalem Christi corpus ac verus et naturalis Christi sanguis
sub speciebus panis et vini vere non est; et quod _ibi est materialis
panis et materiale vinum_ tantum absque veritati et presentia corporis
et sanguinis Christi."--Indictment of Reverend Lawrence Saunders,
January 30, 1555; Harl.  MS. 421, folio 44.

This is an atom: 
"Tenes et defendes in prout quod in eucharistia sive sacramento altaris
verum naturalem et realem Christi corpus ac verus naturalis et realis
Christi sanguis sub speciebus panis et vini vere non est, sed _post
consecratione remanet substantia panis et vini_."--Indictment of
Reverend Thomas Rose, May 31, 1555; Harl.  MS. 421, folio 188.

This is an atom: 
Note 3.  There is the initial M on the pedestal of one or more of these
black Virgins, which of course the priests interpret as Mary.  This is
certainly not the case.  It has been suggested that it stands for Maia,
a name of the Tuscan goddess.  May it not be the initial of Mylitta,
"the Mediatrix," one of the favourite names of the great original
goddess?

This is an atom: 
Note 4.  See Hislop's _Two Babylons_, pages 22, 122, 491, et aliis; and
Shepheard's _Traditions of Eden_, page 117, note (where many references
are given), and page 188.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER TEN.

This is an atom: 
COUNSEL'S OPINION.

This is an atom: 
"A cross of gold, of silver, or of wood,
  Or of mean straw, hid in each shape of life;
  Some trial working for eternal good,
  Found in our outward state or inward strife."

This is an atom: 
"Bab!  Art thou yonder?"

This is an atom: 
"Is it Jennet?"

This is an atom: 
"Ay.  There's a gentlewoman i' th' bower to see thee."

This is an atom: 
"Nay,--a gentlewoman!  Who can it be?"

This is an atom: 
"I've told thee all I know.  Hoo [she] wanted Mistress Clare; and I said
hoo were down at th' parsonage; then hoo said, `Is Barbara Polwhele
here?'  And I said, `Ay, hoo's come o'er to fot [fetch] somewhat for th'
young mistresses.'  So hoo said, `Then I'll speak wi' her.'  So I took
her to my Lady, for I see hoo were a gentlewoman; and hoo's i' th'
bower."

This is an atom: 
"I wis nought of her," said Barbara.  "I never looked to see none here
that I know."

This is an atom: 
"Well, thou'd best go to her," decided Jennet Barbara hurried down, and
found an old silver-haired lady sitting with Lady Enville, and addressed
by her with marked deference.

This is an atom: 
"Well, Bab!" said the old lady, who was brisk enough for her years;
"thou dost not seem no younger since I saw thee in Cornwall, and the
mirror yonder saith neither am I."

This is an atom: 
"Marry La'kin! but if I thought it metely possible, I would say it were
surely Mistress Philippa Basset!"

This is an atom: 
"I will not confute thee, Bab, though it be but metely possible," said
the lively old lady, laughing.  "I came to see the child Clare; but
hearing she was hence, I then demanded thee.  I will go down to the
parsonage anon.  I would like well to see Robin, and Thekla likewise."

This is an atom: 
"Eh, Mistress Philippa! but there be great and sore changes sithence you
were used to come unto the Lamb to see Mistress Avery!"

This is an atom: 
"Go to, Barbara!  Hast dwelt sixty years, more or less, in this world,
and but now found out that all things therein be changeable?  What be
thy changes to mine?  Child, there is not a soul that I loved in those
days when Isoult dwelt in the Minories, that is not now with God in
Heaven.  Not a soul!  Fifty years gone, brethren and sisters, there were
seven of us.  All gone, save me!--a dry old bough, that sticketh yet
upon the tree whence all the fair green shoots have been lopped away.
And I the eldest of all!  The ways of God's Providence be strange."

This is an atom: 
"I said so much once unto Master Robin," responded Barbara with a smile;
"but he answered, 'twas no matter we apprehended not the same, for the
Lord knew all, and ordered the end from the beginning."

This is an atom: 
"He hath ordered me a lonely journey, and a long," said Philippa sadly.
"Well! even a Devon lane hath its turning."

This is an atom: 
"And what brought you thus far north, Mistress Philippa, an' I make not
too bold?"

This is an atom: 
"Why, I came to see Bridget's childre.  I have bidden these four months
gone with Jack Carden.  And being so nigh ye all, I thought I would
never turn home without seeing you."

This is an atom: 
Lady Bridget Carden was the daughter of Philippa Basset's step-father.
They were not really related; but they had been brought up as sisters
from their girlhood.

This is an atom: 
"Nigh, Mistress Philippa!" exclaimed Barbara in surprise.  "What, from
Cheshire hither!"

This is an atom: 
Philippa laughed merrily.  "Marry come up, Bab! thou hast not dwelt
seven years in Calais, as I have, and every yard of lawn for thy
partlets to be fetched from London, and every stone of thy meat to boot.
Why, thou earnest thine own self as far as from Cornwall."

This is an atom: 
"Eh, marry La'kin!  Never came I that way but once, and if God be
served, [if it be His will] I never look to turn again."

This is an atom: 
Philippa turned to Lady Enville, who had sat, or rather reclined,
playing with a hand-screen, while she listened to the preceding
conversation.  "And how goeth it with the child, tell me, Orige?  She is
not yet wed, trow?"

This is an atom: 
"Not yet," replied Lady Enville, with her soft smile.  "I shall ne'er be
astonied if she wed with Arthur Tremayne.  'Twere a very fair match, and
he is good enough for Clare."

This is an atom: 
"A good stock, and an old; and a good lad, I trust.  Thou must have a
care, Orige, not to cast the child away on one that will not deal well
and truly by her."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Arthur would deal well," said Lady Enville carelessly.  "He is a
mighty sobersides, and so is Clare.  They were cut out for one another."

This is an atom: 
"Poor child!" said Philippa.

This is an atom: 
"`Poor child'--and wherefore, Mrs Basset, say you so?"

This is an atom: 
"Because, Orige, it seemeth me she hath no mother."

This is an atom: 
"Nay, Mistress Basset, what signify you?"

This is an atom: 
"No mother, Orige--or as good as none.  An' Clare had been my child, I
had never handed her o'er, to Arthur Tremayne nor any other, with no
more heed than a napron-full of sticks."

This is an atom: 
"Well, in very deed, I do take the better care of the twain for Blanche
to be well matched.  Lo' you, Mistress Basset, Blanche is of good
lineage; and she is rare lovesome--well-nigh as fair as I was at her
years--so that I would not have her to cast herself away, in no wise:
but for Clare--which hath small beauty, and is of little sort--it maketh
not much matter whom she may wed."

This is an atom: 
"Good lack, Orige Enville, is a maid's heart no matter?--is a maid's
life no matter?  Why, woman! thou lackest stirring up with a poker!  I
marvel if I were sent hither to do it."

This is an atom: 
"Gramercy, Mistress Basset!" cried Lady Enville in horror.  "That
stirring up is it which I can in no wise abide."

This is an atom: 
"The which shows how much thou lackest it.  But I am afeard thou art too
far gone for any good.  Well, I will look after the child; and I will
set Thekla on to do it.  And if I find Arthur to be a good man and true,
and Clare reasonable well affected unto him,--trust me, I will not
interfere.  But if not,--Orige, I will not see Walter's child cast away,
if thou wilt."

This is an atom: 
"Nay, good lack, Mrs Basset, what would you do?"

This is an atom: 
Lady Enville knew the energy and determination of the old lady's
character, and that if she set her mind upon a course of action, she was
pretty sure to carry it through, and to make other people do as she
wished.

This is an atom: 
"I will do _that_" said Philippa decidedly.  "I will judge whether the
lot thou hast chalked out for Clare be fit for her."

This is an atom: 
"But in case you judge it not so, what then?"

This is an atom: 
"Then I will have the child away."

This is an atom: 
"I could ne'er allow that, Mistress Basset," said Lady Enville with
unusual decision.

This is an atom: 
"I shall ne'er ask thee, Orige," returned Philippa, with a slightly
contemptuous stress upon the pronoun.  "I will talk with thine husband;
I trust he will hear reason, though thou mayest not.  And I could find
good places enow for Clare; I have many friends in the Court.  My Lady
Dowager of Kent [Susan Bertie, the only daughter of Katherine Duchess of
Suffolk] would work, I know, for Isoult Barry's granddaughter; and so
would Beatrice Vivian [a fictitious person], Isoult's old comrade, that
hath a daughter and a niece to boot in the Queen's chamber.  And I dare
say my Lady Scrope [Note 1] would do somewhat for me.  Any way, I would
assay it."

This is an atom: 
"What, to have Clare in the Queen's Majesty's Court?" demanded Lady
Enville, her eyes sparkling with interest and pleasure.  "O Mistress
Basset, could you not compass the same for Blanche?"

This is an atom: 
"In the Court!  By my troth, nay!" said Philippa heartily.  "I would
never set maid that I cared a pin for in Queen Bess's Court.  Soothly,
there _be_ good women there, but--And as for Blanche,--I will see her,
Orige, ere I say aught.  Blanche hath stole all thine heart, methinks--
so much as there was to steal."

This is an atom: 
"But what meant you touching Clare, Mistress Basset?"

This is an atom: 
"What meant I?  Why, to have her with some worthy and well-conditioned
dame of good degree, that should see her well bestowed.  I would trust
my Lady Dowager of Kent, forsooth, or my Lady Scrope--she is a good
woman and a pleasant--or maybe--"

This is an atom: 
"And my Lady Scrope is herself in the Court, I take it," said Lady
Enville, pursuing her own train of thought, independent of that of
Philippa.

This is an atom: 
"Ay, and were therefore the less fitting," said Philippa coolly.  "Take
no thought thereabout, Orige; I will do nought till I have seen the
maidens."

This is an atom: 
"But, Mistress Basset! you would ne'er count that mine husband's word,
that is not in very deed her father, should weigh against mine, that am
her true and natural mother?" urged Lady Enville in an injured tone.

This is an atom: 
"Thou art her natural mother, Orige, 'tis sooth," was the uncompromising
answer: "but whether true or no, that will I not say.  I rather think
nay than yea.  And if thine husband be better father unto the child than
thou mother, he is the fitter to say what shall come of the maid.  And I
can alway reason with a man easilier than a woman.  Women be geese,
mostly!"

This is an atom: 
With which reasonably plain indication of her sentiments, the old lady
rose and took her leave.  She would have no escort to the parsonage.
She would come back and be introduced to Sir Thomas when she had seen
the girls.  And away she trudged, leaving Lady Enville in the
undesirable situation of one who feels that a stronger will than his own
is moulding his fate, and running counter to his inclinations.

This is an atom: 
Open doors were kept at the parsonage, as was generally the case in
Elizabethan days.  It was therefore no surprise to Mrs Tremayne, who
was occupied in the kitchen, with her one servant Alison acting under
her orders, to hear a smart rap on the door which shut off the kitchen
from the hall.

This is an atom: 
"Come within!" she called in answer, expecting some parishioner in want
of advice or alms.

This is an atom: 
But in marched an upright, brisk old lady, with silver hair, and a stout
staff in her hand.

This is an atom: 
"I am come to see Thekla Rose," said she.

This is an atom: 
Mrs Tremayne was surprised now.  It was thirty years since that name
had belonged to her.

This is an atom: 
"And Thekla Rose has forgot me," added the visitor.

This is an atom: 
"There is a difference betwixt forgetting and not knowing," replied Mrs
Tremayne with a smile.

This is an atom: 
"There is so," returned the old lady.  "Therefore to make me known,
which I see I am not,--my name is Philippa Basset."

This is an atom: 
The exclamation of delighted recognition which broke from the Rector's
wife must have shown Philippa that she was by no means forgotten.  Mrs
Tremayne took her visitor into the parlour, just then unoccupied,--
seated her in a comfortable cushioned chair, and, leaving Alison to bake
or burn the cakes and pie in the oven as she found it convenient, had
thenceforward no eyes and ears but for Philippa Basset.  Certainly the
latter had no cause to doubt herself welcome.

This is an atom: 
"I spake truth, Thekla, child, when I said I was come to see thee.  Yet
it was but the half of truth, for I am come likewise to see Robin: and I
would fain acquaint me with yonder childre.  Be they now within doors?"

This is an atom: 
"They be not all forth, or I mistake," said Mrs Tremayne; and she went
to the door and called them--all four in turn.  Blanche answered from
the head of the stairs, but avowed herself ignorant of the whereabouts
of any one else; and Mrs Tremayne begged her to look for and bring such
as she could find to the parlour, to see an old friend of Clare's
family.

This is an atom: 
In a few minutes Blanche and Lysken presented themselves.  Arthur and
Clare were not to be found.  Philippa's keen, quick eyes surveyed the
two girls as they entered, and mentally took stock of both.

This is an atom: 
"A vain, giddy goose!" was her rapid estimate of Blanche; wherein, if
she did Blanche a little injustice, there was some element of truth.
"Calm and deep, like a river," she said to herself of Lysken: and there
she judged rightly enough.

This is an atom: 
Before any conversation beyond the mere introductions could occur, in
trotted Mrs Rose.

This is an atom: 
"Mistress Philippa, you be the fairest ointment for the eyen that I have
seen these many days!" said the lively little Flemish lady.  --Society,
which the more I think of it astonishes me the more, is founded upon
Cloth.

This is an atom: 
"Often in my atrabiliar moods, when I read of pompous ceremonials,
Frankfort Coronations, Royal Drawing-rooms, Levees, Couchees; and how
the ushers and macers and pursuivants are all in waiting; how Duke this
is presented by Archduke that, and Colonel A by General B, and
innumerable Bishops, Admirals, and miscellaneous Functionaries,
are advancing gallantly to the Anointed Presence; and I strive, in
my remote privacy, to form a clear picture of that solemnity,--on
a sudden, as by some enchanter's wand, the--shall I speak it?

This is an atom: 
--the Clothes fly off the whole dramatic corps; and Dukes, Grandees,
Bishops, Generals, Anointed Presence itself, every mother's son of them,
stand straddling there, not a shirt on them; and I know not whether to
laugh or weep.

This is an atom: 
This physical or psychical infirmity, in which perhaps I am not
singular, I have, after hesitation, thought right to publish, for
the solace of those afflicted with the like."

This is an atom: 
Would to Heaven, say we, thou hadst thought right to keep it secret!
Who is there now that can read the five columns of Presentations
in his Morning Newspaper without a shudder?

This is an atom: 
Hypochondriac men, and all men are to a certain extent hypochondriac,
should be more gently treated. With what readiness our fancy, in this
shattered state of the nerves, follows out the consequences which
Teufelsdrockh, with a devilish coolness, goes on to draw:--
"What would Majesty do, could such an accident befall in reality;
should the buttons all simultaneously start, and the solid wool
evaporate, in very Deed, as here in Dream?

This is an atom: 
_Ach Gott_! How each skulks into the nearest hiding-place; their high
State Tragedy (_Haupt- und Staats-Action_) becomes a Pickleherring-Farce
to weep at, which is the worst kind of Farce; _the tables_ (according
to Horace), and with them, the whole fabric of Government, Legislation,
Property, Police, and Civilized Society, _are dissolved_, in wails
and howls."

This is an atom: 
Lives the man that can figure a naked Duke of Windlestraw addressing
a naked House of Lords?

This is an atom: 
Imagination, choked as in mephitic air, recoils on itself, and will
not forward with the picture.

This is an atom: 
The Woolsack, the Ministerial, the Opposition Benches--_infandum!
infandum_!

This is an atom: 
And yet why is the thing impossible?

This is an atom: 
Was not every soul, or rather every body, of these Guardians of our
Liberties, naked, or nearly so, last night; "a forked Radish with
a head fantastically carved"?

This is an atom: 
And why might he not, did our stern fate so order it, walk out to St.

This is an atom: 
Stephen's, as well as into bed, in that no-fashion; and there, with
other similar Radishes, hold a Bed of Justice? "Solace of those afflicted
with the like!" Unhappy Teufelsdrockh, had man ever such a "physical
or psychical infirmity" before? And now how many, perhaps, may thy
unparalleled confession (which we, even to the sounder British world,
and goaded on by Critical and Biographical duty, grudge to reimpart)
incurably infect therewith!

This is an atom: 
Art thou the malignest of Sansculottists, or only the maddest?

This is an atom: 
"It will remain to be examined," adds the inexorable Teufelsdrockh,
"in how far the SCARECROW, as a Clothed Person, is not also entitled
to benefit of clergy, and English trial by jury: nay perhaps,
considering his high function (for is not he too a Defender of
Property, and Sovereign armed with the _terrors_ of the Law?)

This is an atom: 
, to a certain royal Immunity and Inviolability; which, however, misers
and the meaner class of persons are not always voluntarily disposed
to grant him."
"O my Friends, we are [in Yorick Sterne's words] but as 'turkeys
driven, with a stick and red clout, to the market:' or if some
drivers, as they do in Norfolk, take a dried bladder and put peas
in it, the rattle thereof terrifies the boldest!"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER X. PURE REASON.

This is an atom: 
It must now be apparent enough that our Professor, as above hinted,
is a speculative Radical, and of the very darkest tinge; acknowledging,
for most part, in the solemnities and paraphernalia of civilized
Life, which we make so much of, nothing but so many Cloth-rags,
turkey-poles, and "bladders with dried peas."

This is an atom: 
To linger among such speculations, longer than mere Science requires, a
discerning public can have no wish. For our purposes the simple fact that
such a _Naked World_ is possible, nay actually exists (under the
Clothed one), will be sufficient.

This is an atom: 
Much, therefore, we omit about "Kings wrestling naked on the green
with Carmen," and the Kings being thrown: "dissect them with
scalpels," says Teufelsdrockh; "the same viscera, tissues, livers,
lights, and other life-tackle, are there: examine their spiritual
mechanism; the same great Need, great Greed, and little Faculty;
nay ten to one but the Carman, who understands draught-cattle, the
rimming of wheels, something of the laws of unstable and stable
equilibrium, with other branches of wagon-science, and has actually
put forth his hand and operated on Nature, is the more cunningly
gifted of the two.

This is an atom: 
Whence, then, their so unspeakable difference? From Clothes." Much also
we shall omit about confusion of Ranks, and Joan and My Lady, and
how it would be everywhere "Hail fellow well met," and Chaos were
come again: all which to any one that has once fairly pictured out
the grand mother-idea, _Society in a state of Nakedness_, will
spontaneously suggest itself.

This is an atom: 
Should some sceptical individual still entertain doubts whether in a
world without Clothes, the smallest Politeness, Polity, or even
Police, could exist, let him turn to the original Volume, and view
there the boundless Serbonian Bog of Sansculottism, stretching sour
and pestilential: over which we have lightly flown; where not only
whole armies but whole nations might sink!

This is an atom: 
If indeed the following argument, in its brief riveting emphasis,
be not of itself incontrovertible and final:--
"Are we Opossums; have we natural Pouches, like the Kangaroo?

This is an atom: 
Or how, without Clothes, could we possess the master-organ, soul's seat,
and true pineal gland of the Body Social: I mean, a PURSE?"
Nevertheless it is impossible to hate Professor Teufelsdrockh; at
worst, one knows not whether to hate or to love him.

This is an atom: 
For though, in looking at the fair tapestry of human Life, with its royal
and even sacred figures, he dwells not on the obverse alone, but here
chiefly on the reverse; and indeed turns out the rough seams, tatters,
and manifold thrums of that unsightly wrong-side, with an almost
diabolic patience and indifference, which must have sunk him in the
estimation of most readers,--there is that within which unspeakably
distinguishes him from all other past and present Sansculottists.

This is an atom: 
The grand unparalleled peculiarity of Teufelsdrockh is, that with all this
Descendentalism, he combines a Transcendentalism, no less superlative;
whereby if on the one hand he degrade man below most animals, except
those jacketed Gouda Cows, he, on the other, exalts him beyond the
visible Heavens, almost to an equality with the Gods.

This is an atom: 
"To the eye of vulgar Logic," says he, "what is man? An omnivorous Biped
that wears Breeches. To the eye of Pure Reason what is he? A Soul, a
Spirit, and divine Apparition. Round his mysterious ME, there lies,
under all those wool-rags, a Garment of Flesh (or of Senses), contextured
in the Loom of Heaven; whereby he is revealed to his like, and dwells
with them in UNION and DIVISION; and sees and fashions for himself
a Universe, with azure Starry Spaces, and long Thousands of Years.

This is an atom: 
Deep-hidden is he under that strange Garment; amid Sounds and Colors
and Forms, as it were, swathed in, and inextricably over-shrouded:
yet it is sky-woven, and worthy of a God.

This is an atom: 
Stands he not thereby in the centre of Immensities, in the conflux
of Eternities?

This is an atom: 
He feels; power has been given him to know, to believe; nay does
not the spirit of Love, free in its celestial primeval brightness,
even here, though but for moments, look through?

This is an atom: 
Well said Saint Chrysostom, with his lips of gold, 'the true SHEKINAH
is Man:' where else is the GOD'S-PRESENCE manifested not to our
eyes only, but to our hearts, as in our fellow-man?"

This is an atom: 
In such passages, unhappily too rare, the high Platonic Mysticism of our
Author, which is perhaps the fundamental element of his nature,
bursts forth, as it were, in full flood: and, through all the vapor
and tarnish of what is often so perverse, so mean in his exterior
and environment, we seem to look into a whole inward Sea of Light
and Love;--though, alas, the grim coppery clouds soon roll together
again, and hide it from view.

This is an atom: 
Such tendency to Mysticism is everywhere traceable in this man;
and indeed, to attentive readers, must have been long ago apparent.

This is an atom: 
Nothing that he sees but has more than a common meaning, but has two
meanings:
thus, if in the highest Imperial Sceptre and Charlemagne-Mantle, as well
as in the poorest Ox-goad and Gypsy-Blanket, he finds Prose, Decay,
Contemptibility; there is in each sort Poetry also, and a reverend Worth.
For Matter, were it never so despicable, is Spirit, the manifestation of
Spirit: were it never so honorable, can it be more?

This is an atom: 
The thing Visible, nay the thing Imagined, the thing in any way conceived
as Visible, what is it but a Garment, a Clothing of the higher,
celestial Invisible, "unimaginable formless, dark with excess of
bright"?

This is an atom: 
Under which point of view the following passage, so strange in purport,
so strange in phrase, seems characteristic enough:--
"The beginning of all Wisdom is to look fixedly on Clothes, or even
with armed eyesight, till they become _transparent_.

This is an atom: 
'The Philosopher,' says the wisest of this age, 'must station himself
in the middle:' how true!
The Philosopher is he to whom the Highest has descended, and the Lowest
has mounted up; who is the equal and kindly brother of all.

This is an atom: 
"Shall we tremble before clothwebs and cobwebs, whether woven in
Arkwright looms, or by the silent Arachnes that weave unrestingly
in our Imagination?

This is an atom: 
Or, on the other hand, what is there that we cannot love; since all
was created by God?

This is an atom: 
"Happy he who can look through the Clothes of a Man (the woollen,
and fleshly, and official Bank-paper and State-paper Clothes) into
the Man himself; and discern, it may be, in this or the other Dread
Potentate, a more or less incompetent Digestive-apparatus; yet also
an inscrutable venerable Mystery, in the meanest Tinker that sees
with eyes!"

This is an atom: 
For the rest, as is natural to a man of this kind, he deals much in the
feeling of Wonder; insists on the necessity and high worth of universal
Wonder; which he holds to be the only reasonable temper for the denizen
of so singular a Planet as ours. "Wonder," says he, "is the basis of
Worship: the reign of wonder is perennial, indestructible in Man; only
at certain stages (as the present), it is, for some short season, a
reign _in partibus infidelium_." That progress of Science, which is
to destroy Wonder, and in its stead substitute Mensuration and
Numeration, finds small favor with Teufelsdrockh, much as he
otherwise venerates these two latter processes.

This is an atom: 
"Shall your Science," exclaims he, "proceed in the small chink-lighted,
or even oil-lighted, underground workshop of Logic alone; and man's
mind become an Arithmetical Mill, whereof Memory is the Hopper, and
mere Tables of Sines and Tangents, Codification, and Treatises of
what you call Political Economy, are the Meal?

This is an atom: 
And what is that Science, which the scientific head alone, were it
screwed off, and (like the Doctor's in the Arabian Tale) set in a basin
to keep it alive, could prosecute without shadow of a heart,--but
one other of the mechanical and menial handicrafts, for which the
Scientific Head (having a Soul in it) is too noble an organ?

This is an atom: 
I mean that Thought without Reverence is barren, perhaps poisonous; at
best, dies like cookery with the day that called it forth; does not live,
like sowing, in successive tilths and wider-spreading harvests,
bringing food and plenteous increase to all Time."

This is an atom: 
In such wise does Teufelsdrockh deal hits, harder or softer, according
to ability; yet ever, as we would fain persuade ourselves, with
charitable intent.

This is an atom: 
Above all, that class of "Logic-choppers, and treble-pipe Scoffers, and
professed Enemies to Wonder; who, in these days, so numerously patrol
as night-constables about the Mechanics' Institute of Science, and
cackle, like true Old-Roman geese and goslings round their Capitol,
on any alarm, or on none; nay who often, as illuminated Sceptics,
walk abroad into peaceable society, in full daylight, with rattle
and lantern, and insist on guiding you and guarding you therewith,
though the Sun is shining, and the street populous with mere
justice-loving men:" that whole class is inexpressibly wearisome
to him.

This is an atom: 
Hear with what uncommon animation he perorates:--
"The man who cannot wonder, who does not habitually wonder (and
worship), were he President of innumerable Royal Societies, and
carried the whole _Mecanique Celeste_ and _Hegel's Philosophy_, and
the epitome of all Laboratories and Observatories with their results,
in his single head,--is but a Pair of Spectacles behind which there
is no Eye.

This is an atom: 
Let those who have Eyes look through him, then he may be useful.

This is an atom: 
"Thou wilt have no Mystery and Mysticism; wilt walk through thy world by
the sunshine of what thou callest Truth, or even by the hand-lamp of
what I call Attorney-Logic; and 'explain' all, 'account' for all,
or believe nothing of it?

This is an atom: 
Nay, thou wilt attempt laughter; whoso recognizes the unfathomable,
all-pervading domain of Mystery, which is everywhere under our feet and
among our hands; to whom the Universe is an Oracle and Temple, as well
as a Kitchen and Cattle-stall,--he shall be a delirious Mystic;
to him thou, with sniffing charity, wilt protrusively proffer thy
hand-lamp, and shriek, as one injured, when he kicks his foot through
it?

This is an atom: 
--_Armer Teufel_!

This is an atom: 
Doth not thy cow calve, doth not thy bull gender? Thou thyself, wert
thou not born, wilt thou not die?

This is an atom: 
'Explain' me all this, or do one of two things: Retire into private
places with thy foolish cackle; or, what were better, give it up,
and weep, not that the reign of wonder is done, and God's world all
disembellished and prosaic, but that thou hitherto art a Dilettante
and sand-blind Pedant."

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XI. PROSPECTIVE.

This is an atom: 
The Philosophy of Clothes is now to all readers, as we predicted
it would do, unfolding itself into new boundless expansions, of a
cloud-capt, almost chimerical aspect, yet not without azure loomings in
the far distance, and streaks as of an Elysian brightness; the highly
questionable purport and promise of which it is becoming more and more
important for us to ascertain. Is that a real Elysian brightness, cries
many a timid wayfarer, or the reflex of Pandemonian lava? Is it of a
truth leading us into beatific Asphodel meadows, or the yellow-burning
marl of a Hell-on-Earth?

This is an atom: 
Our Professor, like other Mystics, whether delirious or inspired, gives
an Editor enough to do.

This is an atom: 
Ever higher and dizzier are the heights he leads us to; more piercing,
all-comprehending, all-confounding are his views and glances.

This is an atom: 
For example, this of Nature being not an Aggregate but a Whole:--
"Well sang the Hebrew Psalmist: 'If I take the wings of the morning
and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Universe, God is there.'

This is an atom: 
Thou thyself, O cultivated reader, who too probably art no Psalmist, but
a Prosaist, knowing GOD only by tradition, knowest thou any corner
of the world where at least FORCE is not?

This is an atom: 
The drop which thou shakest from thy wet hand, rests not where it
falls, but to-morrow thou findest it swept away; already on the
wings of the North-wind, it is nearing the Tropic of Cancer.

This is an atom: 
How came it to evaporate, and not lie motionless?

This is an atom: 
Thinkest thou there is aught motionless; without Force, and utterly
dead?

This is an atom: 
"As I rode through the Schwarzwald, I said to myself: That little fire
which glows star-like across the dark-growing (_nachtende_) moor,
where the sooty smith bends over his anvil, and thou hopest to
replace thy lost horse-shoe,--is it a detached, separated speck,
cut off from the whole Universe; or indissolubly joined to the whole?

This is an atom: 
Thou fool, that smithy-fire was (primarily) kindled at the Sun; is fed
by air that circulates from before Noah's Deluge, from beyond the
Dog-star; therein, with Iron Force, and Coal Force, and the far stranger
Force of Man, are cunning affinities and battles and victories of Force
brought about; it is a little ganglion, or nervous centre, in the great
vital system of Immensity. Call it, if thou wilt, an unconscious
Altar, kindled on the bosom of the All; whose iron sacrifice, whose iron
smoke and influence reach quite through the All; whose dingy Priest,
not by word, yet by brain and sinew, preaches forth the mystery of Force;
nay preaches forth (exoterically enough) one little textlet from the
Gospel of Freedom, the Gospel of Man's Force, commanding, and one day
to be all-commanding.

This is an atom: 
"Detached, separated!

This is an atom: 
I say there is no such separation: nothing hitherto was ever stranded,
cast aside; but all, were it only a withered leaf, works together
with all; is borne forward on the bottomless, shoreless flood of
Action, and lives through perpetual metamorphoses.

This is an atom: 
The withered leaf is not dead and lost, there are Forces in it and
around it, though working in inverse order; else how could it rot?

This is an atom: 
Despise not the rag from which man makes Paper, or the litter from which
the earth makes Corn. Rightly viewed no meanest object is insignificant;
all objects are as windows, through which the philosophic eye looks
into Infinitude itself."

This is an atom: 
Again, leaving that wondrous Schwarzwald Smithy-Altar, what vacant,
high-sailing air-ships are these, and whither will they sail with
us?

This is an atom: 
"All visible things are emblems; what thou seest is not there on
its own account; strictly taken, is not there at all: Matter exists
only spiritually, and to represent some Idea, and _body_ it forth.

This is an atom: 
Hence Clothes, as despicable as we think them, are so unspeakably
significant.

This is an atom: 
Clothes, from the King's mantle downwards, are emblematic, not of
want only, but of a manifold cunning Victory over Want.

This is an atom: 
On the other hand, all Emblematic things are properly Clothes,
thought-woven or hand-woven:
must not the Imagination weave Garments, visible Bodies, wherein
the else invisible creations and inspirations of our Reason are,
like Spirits, revealed, and first become all-powerful; the rather
if, as we often see, the Hand too aid her, and (by wool Clothes or
otherwise) reveal such even to the outward eye?

This is an atom: 
"Men are properly said to be clothed with Authority, clothed with
Beauty, with Curses, and the like.

This is an atom: 
Nay, if you consider it, what is Man himself, and his whole terrestrial
Life, but an Emblem; a Clothing or visible Garment for that divine
ME of his, cast hither, like a light-particle, down from Heaven?

This is an atom: 
Thus is he said also to be clothed with a Body.

This is an atom: 
"Language is called the Garment of Thought: however, it should rather be,
Language is the Flesh-Garment, the Body, of Thought. I said that
Imagination wove this Flesh-Garment; and does not she? Metaphors are her
stuff: examine Language; what, if you except some few primitive elements
(of natural sound), what is it all but Metaphors, recognized as such,
or no longer recognized; still fluid and florid, or now solid-grown
and colorless?

This is an atom: 
If those same primitive elements are the osseous fixtures in the
Flesh-Garment, Language,--then are Metaphors its muscles and tissues
and living integuments.

This is an atom: 
An unmetaphorical style you shall in vain seek for: is not your very
_Attention_ a _Stretching-to_? The difference lies here: some styles are
lean, adust, wiry, the muscle itself seems osseous; some are even quite
pallid, hunger-bitten and dead-looking; while others again glow in the
flush of health and vigorous self-growth, sometimes (as in my own case)
not without an apoplectic tendency.

This is an atom: 
Moreover, there are sham Metaphors, which overhanging that same
Thought's-Body (best naked), and deceptively bedizening, or
bolstering it out, may be called its false stuffings, superfluous
show-cloaks (_Putz-Mantel_), and tawdry woollen rags: whereof he
that runs and reads may gather whole hampers,--and burn them."

This is an atom: 
Than which paragraph on Metaphors did the reader ever chance to see
a more surprisingly metaphorical?

This is an atom: 
However, that is not our chief grievance; the Professor continues:--

This is an atom: 
"Why multiply instances? It is written, the Heavens and the Earth shall
fade away like a Vesture; which indeed they are: the Time-vesture
of the Eternal.

This is an atom: 
Whatsoever sensibly exists, whatsoever represents Spirit to Spirit, is
properly a Clothing, a suit of Raiment, put on for a season, and to be
laid off. Thus in this one pregnant subject of CLOTHES, rightly understood,
is included all that men have thought, dreamed, done, and been: the
whole External Universe and what it holds is but Clothing; and the
essence of all Science lies in the PHILOSOPHY OF CLOTHES."

This is an atom: 
Towards these dim infinitely expanded regions, close-bordering on
the impalpable Inane, it is not without apprehension, and perpetual
difficulties, that the Editor sees himself journeying and struggling.

This is an atom: 
Till lately a cheerful daystar of hope hung before him, in the
expected Aid of Hofrath Heuschrecke; which daystar, however, melts
now, not into the red of morning, but into a vague, gray half-light,
uncertain whether dawn of day or dusk of utter darkness.

This is an atom: 
For the last week, these so-called Biographical Documents are in his hand.
By the kindness of a Scottish Hamburg Merchant, whose name, known
to the whole mercantile world, he must not mention; but whose
honorable courtesy, now and often before spontaneously manifested
to him, a mere literary stranger, he cannot soon forget,--the bulky
Weissnichtwo Packet, with all its Custom-house seals, foreign
hieroglyphs, and miscellaneous tokens of Travel, arrived here in
perfect safety, and free of cost.

This is an atom: 
The reader shall now fancy with what hot haste it was broken up,
with what breathless expectation glanced over; and, alas, with what
unquiet disappointment it has, since then, been often thrown down,
and again taken up.

This is an atom: 
Hofrath Heuschrecke, in a too long-winded Letter, full of compliments,
Weissnichtwo politics, dinners, dining repartees, and other ephemeral
trivialities, proceeds to remind us of what we knew well already:
that however it may be with Metaphysics, and other abstract Science
originating in the Head (_Verstand_) alone, no Life-Philosophy
(_Lebensphilosophie_), such as this of Clothes pretends to be, which
originates equally in the Character (_Gemuth_), and equally speaks
thereto, can attain its significance till the Character itself is
known and seen; "till the Author's View of the World (_Weltansicht_),
and how he actively and passively came by such view, are clear: in
short till a Biography of him has been philosophico-poetically
written, and philosophico-poetically read....

This is an atom: 
Nay," adds he, "were the speculative scientific Truth even known,
you still, in this inquiring age, ask yourself, Whence came it, and
Why, and How?

This is an atom: 
--and rest not, till, if no better may be, Fancy have shaped out an answer;
and either in the authentic lineaments of Fact, or the forged ones
of Fiction, a complete picture and Genetical History of the Man and
his spiritual Endeavor lies before you.

This is an atom: 
But why," says the Hofrath, and indeed say we, "do I dilate on the
uses of our Teufelsdrockh's Biography?

This is an atom: 
The great Herr Minister von Goethe has penetratingly remarked that Man is
properly the _only_ object that interests man:' thus I too have
noted, that in Weissnichtwo our whole conversation is little or
nothing else but Biography or Autobiography; ever humano-anecdotical
(_menschlich-anekdotisch_).

This is an atom: 
Biography is by nature the most universally profitable, universally
pleasant of all things: especially Biography of distinguished
individuals.

This is an atom: 
"By this time, _mein Verehrtester_ (my Most Esteemed)," continues he, with
an eloquence which, unless the words be purloined from Teufelsdrockh,
or some trick of his, as we suspect, is well-nigh unaccountable, "by
this time you are fairly plunged (_vertieft_) in that mighty forest of
Clothes-Philosophy; and looking round, as all readers do, with astonishment
enough. Such portions and passages as you have already mastered, and
brought to paper, could not but awaken a strange curiosity touching
the mind they issued from; the perhaps unparalleled psychical mechanism,
which manufactured such matter, and emitted it to the light of day.
Had Teufelsdrockh also a father and mother; did he, at one time, wear
drivel-bibs, and live on spoon-meat? Did he ever, in rapture and
tears, clasp a friend's bosom to his; looks he also wistfully into
the long burial-aisle of the Past, where only winds, and their low
harsh moan, give inarticulate answer?

This is an atom: 
Has he fought duels;--good Heaven! how did he comport himself when
in Love?

This is an atom: 
By what singular stair-steps, in short, and subterranean passages, and
sloughs of Despair, and steep Pisgah hills, has he reached this wonderful
prophetic Hebron (a true Old-Clothes Jewry) where he now dwells?

This is an atom: 
Meanwhile, Clare was honestly trying to do the work set her well, and to
be contented with it.  She often carried her troubles to Mrs Tremayne,
and sought advice or cheering at her hands: nor was she ever sent away
unsatisfied.  Rachel was delighted with Clare's steady and cheerful
help, and complacently thought that the parsonage had done her good.

This is an atom: 
So the summer drew on, and Margaret was married to Harry Travis, and
went to live in another part of the county.

This is an atom: 
On a late afternoon in autumn, Clare stood in the arbour, tying up
bouquets.  An old friend of Sir Thomas was expected on a visit, and was
likely to arrive that evening.  This was Sir Piers Feversham,
[fictitious person] a Norfolk knight, of Lancashire extraction on his
mother's side, who had not seen Sir Thomas Enville since both had been
young squires together in the household of the Earl of Derby.  His
nephew and heir presumptive, John Feversham, [fictitious person] was
coming with him.  There was little presumption, to all appearance, about
the heirship, for Sir Piers bore the character of a confirmed old
bachelor, and was now upwards of sixty.

This is an atom: 
Clare's bouquets were nearly all tied up, and ready to be carried to the
hall, which was to be decorated in honour of the guests.  She was tying
the last but one, when she heard slow footsteps and low voices passing
on the outside of the arbour.  Not too low, however, for two sentences
to be audible inside,--words which blanched Clare's cheek, and made her
trembling fingers loose their hold, till the gathered flowers slid away
one by one, and lay a fragrant mass on the ground at her feet.

This is an atom: 
The remarks which she overheard were limited to a fervent appeal and a
low reply.  The appeal--which was a declaration of love--was uttered in
the familiar accents of Arthur Tremayne; and the answer--a vague
disclaimer of merit which sounded like a shy affirmative--came in the
low, soft voice of Lucrece Enville.

This is an atom: 
Clare was totally ignorant of the fate which her mother had designed for
her; nor had she ever realised until that evening that she cared more
for Arthur than she did for Jack.  They were both like brothers to her:
but now she suddenly felt that if it had been Jack whose voice she had
heard uttering similar words, it would have mattered little or nothing
to her.

This is an atom: 
The hardest thought of all was that of resigning him to Lucrece.
Fourteen years had elapsed since that day of their childhood on which
Clare had witnessed the first instance of Lucrece's duplicity; but she
had never been able to forget it, and it had infused a sort of vague
discomfort and constraint into all their intercourse.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, if it had been Lysken!" said Clare to her own heart.  "I could have
borne it better."

This is an atom: 
And it had to be borne, and in utter silence.  _This_ trouble could not
be carried to Mrs Tremayne; and the idea of betraying Lucrece, as that
young lady had herself betrayed Blanche, would have seemed black
treachery to Clare.  No, things must take their course: and let them
take it, so long as that would make Arthur happy, and would be for his
good.  In her inmost heart Clare was sorely doubtful about both items.
Well, she could ask God to grant them.

This is an atom: 
It was half an hour later than she had expected when Clare carried her
nosegays into the hall.  She went on mechanically putting them in order,
and finding, when she had finished, that there was one more than was
needed, she carried it to her mother's boudoir.

This is an atom: 
"How late thou art, Clare!" said Lady Enville, looking up from Sir
Philip Sidney's Arcadia, which she was lazily reading.  "Sir Piers may
come now at any minute.  Hast made an end in the hall?"

This is an atom: 
"Ay, Madam."

This is an atom: 
"Hast one posy left o'er?  Set it here, by my chair, child.  Dost know
where is Blanche?"

This is an atom: 
"No, Madam."

This is an atom: 
"And Lucrece?"

This is an atom: 
"No, Madam."

This is an atom: 
Clare's conscience smote her as soon as she had given this answer.
Certainly she did not know where Lucrece was; but she could very well
guess.

This is an atom: 
"I would thou wert not fully thus bashful, Clare; hast nought but `Ay'
and `No'?--I would fain have thee seek Lucrece: I desire speech of her."

This is an atom: 
Clare did not reply at all this time.  She had disposed of her flowers,
and she left the room.

This is an atom: 
Seek Lucrece!  Clare had never had a harder task.  If the same burden
had been laid on them, Lucrece would have left the commission
unfulfilled, and Blanche would have sent somebody else.  But such
alternatives did not even suggest themselves to Clare's conscientious
mind.  She went through the hall towards the garden door in search of
Lucrece.

This is an atom: 
"Child, what aileth thee?" asked a voice suddenly, as Clare was opening
the garden door.

This is an atom: 
"I?" said Clare absently.  "Lucrece--my mother would have me seek her."

This is an atom: 
"Sit thee down, and I will send her to thy mother," said Rachel.

This is an atom: 
Away she went; and Clare sat down by the fire, feeling just then as if
she could do little else.  Lucrece glided through the hall with her
smooth, silent step, but did not appear to see Clare; and Rachel
followed in a minute.

This is an atom: 
"I have sent Lucrece to thy mother," she said.  "Now, child, what aileth
thee?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh--nothing, Aunt Rachel."

This is an atom: 
"When I was a small maid, Clare, my mother told me that 'twas not well
to lie."

This is an atom: 
"I did not--Aunt Rachel, I cry you mercy--I meant not--"

This is an atom: 
"Thou meantest not to tell me what ailed thee.  I know that.  But I mean
to hear it, Clare."

This is an atom: 
"'Tis nought, in very deed, Aunt--of any moment."

This is an atom: 
"Nought of any moment to thee?"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, to--Oh, pray you, ask me not, Aunt Rachel!  It makes no matter."

This is an atom: 
"Ha!  When a maid saith that,--a maid of thy years, Clare,--I know
metely well what she signifieth.  Thou art a good child.  Get thee
up-stairs and pin on thy carnation knots."

This is an atom: 
Clare went up the wide hall staircase with a slow, tired step, and
without making any answer beyond a faint attempt at a smile.

This is an atom: 
"Ha!" said Rachel again, to herself.  "Providence doth provide all
things.  Methinks, though, at times, 'tis by the means of men and women,
the which He maketh into little providences.  I could find it in mine
heart to fall to yonder game but now.  Only I will bide quiet, methinks,
till to-morrow.  Well-a-day! if yon grandmother Eve of ours had ne'er
ate yon apple!  Yet Master Tremayne will have it that I did eat it mine
own self.  Had I so done, Adam might have whistled for a quarter.  The
blind, stumbling moles men are!  Set a pearl and a pebble afore them,
and my new shoes to an old shoeing-horn, but they shall pick up the
pebble, and courtesy unto you for your grace.  And set your mind on a
lad that you do count to have more sense than the rest, and beshrew me
if he show you not in fair colours ere the week be out that he is as
great a dunce as any.  I reckon Jack shall be the next.  Well, well!--
let the world wag.  'Twill all be o'er an hundred years hence.  They
shall be doing it o'er again by then.  Howbeit, 'tis ill work to weep
o'er spilt milk."

This is an atom: 
Sir Piers Feversham and his nephew arrived late that evening.  The
former was a little older than Sir Thomas Enville, and had mixed more in
general society;--a talkative, good-natured man, full of anecdote; and
Blanche at least found him very entertaining.

This is an atom: 
John Feversham, the nephew, was almost the antipodes of his uncle.  He
was not handsome, but there was an open, honest look in his grey eyes
which bore the impress of sincerity.  All his movements were slow and
deliberate, his manners very quiet and calm, his speech grave and
sedate.  Nothing in the shape of repartee could be expected from him;
and with him Blanche was fairly disgusted.

This is an atom: 
"As sober as a judge, and as heavy as a leaden seal!" said that young
lady,--who had been his next neighbour at the supper-table,--when she
was giving in her report to Clare while they were undressing.  "He hath
but an owl's eye for beauty, of whatever fashion.  Thou mindest how fair
was the sunset this even?  Lo' thou, he could see nought but a deal of
water in the sea, and divers coloured clouds in the sky.  Stupid old
companion!"

This is an atom: 
"And prithee, Mistress Blanche, who ever did see aught in the sea saving
a cruel great parcel of water?"

This is an atom: 
"Good lack, Bab!--thou art as ill as he.  Clare, what seest thou in the
sea?"

This is an atom: 
Clare tried to bring her thoughts down to the subject.

This is an atom: 
"I scantly know, Blanche.  'Tis rarely beautiful, in some ways.  Yet it
soundeth to me alway very sorrowful."

This is an atom: 
"Ay so, Mistress Clare!" returned Barbara.  "It may belike to thee, poor
sweet heart, whose father was killed thereon,--and to me, that had a
brother which died far away on the Spanish main."

This is an atom: 
"I suppose," answered Clare sighing, "matters sound unto us according as
we are disposed."

This is an atom: 
"Marry, and if so, some folks' voices should sound mighty discordant,"
retorted Barbara.

This is an atom: 
Blanche was soon asleep; but there was little sleep for Clare that
night.  Nor was there much for Rachel.  Since Margaret's marriage,
Lucrece had shared her aunt's chamber; for it would have been thought
preposterous in the Elizabethan era to give a young girl a bedroom to
herself.  Rachel watched her niece narrowly; but Lucrece neither said
nor did anything from which the least information could be gleaned.  She
was neither elated nor depressed, but just as usual,--demure, slippery,
and unaccountable.

This is an atom: 
Rachel kept her eye also, like an amateur detective, upon Arthur.  He
came frequently, and generally managed to get a walk with Lucrece in the
garden.  On two occasions the detective, seated at her own window, which
overlooked the garden, saw that Arthur was entreating or urging
something, to which Lucrece would not consent.

This is an atom: 
The month of Sir Piers Feversham's stay was drawing to a close, and
still Rachel had not spoken to her brother about Lucrece.  She felt
considerably puzzled as to what it would be either right or wise to do.
Lucrece was no foolish, romantic, inexperienced child like Blanche, but
a woman of considerable worldly wisdom and strong self-reliance.  It was
no treachery to interfere with her, in her aunt's eyes, since Lucrece
herself had been the traitor; and for Clare's sake Rachel longed to
rescue Arthur, whom she considered infatuated and misled.

This is an atom: 
Before Rachel had been able to make up her mind on this point, one
Saturday afternoon Sir Thomas sought her, and asked her to come to the
library.

This is an atom: 
"Rachel," he said, "I would fain have thy counsel.  Sir Piers
Feversham--much to mine amazing--hath made me offer of service
[courtship] for Lucrece.  What thinkest thereon?"

This is an atom: 
"Brother, leave her go!"

This is an atom: 
"He is by three years elder than I, Rachel."

This is an atom: 
"Ne'er mind thou."

This is an atom: 
"Methinks he should make the maid a good husband?" remarked Sir Thomas
interrogatively.

This is an atom: 
"Better than she shall make him a wife," said Rachel grimly.

This is an atom: 
"Rachel!"

This is an atom: 
"Brother, I have ne'er said this to thee aforetime; but my true
conviction is that Lucrece is a mischief-maker, and until she be hence,
there is like to be little peace for any.  I saw not all things at the
first; but I can tell thee now that she hath won Arthur Tremayne into
her toils, and methinks she tried hard to compass Don Juan.  If she will
wed with Sir Piers (and he dare venture on her!) let it be so: he is old
enough to have a care of himself; and she is less like to wreck his life
than she should be with a younger man.  In good sooth, there is all the
less of it to wreck."

This is an atom: 
"Yet, Rachel, if the maid be entangled with Arthur--"

This is an atom: 
"Make thy mind easy, Tom.  'Tis Arthur is entangled, not she.  Trust her
for that!  She hath good enough scissors for the cutting of a like
knot."

This is an atom: 
"Arthur ne'er spake word to me," said Sir Thomas, with a perplexed,
meditative air.

This is an atom: 
"That is it which I would know, Tom.  Ne'er spake word, quotha?  So much
the better.  Well!  I reckon thou shalt be like to tell Orige; but leave
her not persuade thee to the contrary course.  Yet I think she is scarce
like.  A knighthood and Feversham Hall shall go down very sweetly with
her."

This is an atom: 
"But there is yet another matter, Rachel.  Sir Piers maketh offer to set
Jack in good place about the Court, for the which he saith he hath
power.  What sayest to that, trow?"

This is an atom: 
"I say that Jack is safe to go to wrack some whither, and may be 'twere
as well hence as hither."

This is an atom: 
"It shall be mighty chargeable, I fear," said Sir Thomas thoughtfully.

This is an atom: 
"Jack shall be that any whither."

This is an atom: 
"Wouldst have me, then, say Ay to both offers?"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, think well touching Jack first.  I meant not that.  Good sooth!  I
sorely misdoubt--"

This is an atom: 
"Well, I will see what saith Orige unto both, and Jack and Lucrece to
either."

This is an atom: 
"If I be a prophet," answered Rachel, "one and all shall say, Ay."

This is an atom: 
If that were the criterion, Rachel proved a prophet One and all did say
ay.  Lady Enville was enchanted with both schemes.  Jack averred that
life at home was a very humdrum kind of thing, and life might be worth
having in London, and at Court.  And Lucrece, in her demure style,
softly declared that she was thankful for Sir Piers' goodness, and would
gladly accept his offer, though she felt that her merits were not equal
to the kind estimate which he had formed of her.

This is an atom: 
"But, Lucrece," said her father gravely, "one told me that Arthur
Tremayne had made suit unto thee."

This is an atom: 
If he expected the mask to drop for an instant from the soft, regular
features of Lucrece, he was sadly disappointed.  Not a look, nor a
gesture, showed that she felt either surprised or disconcerted.

This is an atom: 
"'Tis true, Father.  The poor lad did say some like words unto me.  But
I gave him no encouragement to seek you."

This is an atom: 
"Thou wouldst have me to conceive, then, that thou art wholly free from
any plight whatsoe'er unto Arthur?"

This is an atom: 
"Wholly free, Father.  I ne'er gave him to wit otherwise."

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas believed her; Rachel did not.  The next thing, in the
squire's honest eyes, was to let Arthur know that Lucrece was about to
marry Sir Piers,--not directly, since Arthur himself had made no open
declaration; but he proposed to go down to the parsonage, and mention
the fact, as if incidentally, in Arthur's presence.  He found Lucrece
rather averse to this scheme.

This is an atom: 
"It should but trouble the poor lad," she said.  "Why not leave him
discover the same as matters shall unfold them?"

This is an atom: 
"Tom!" said Rachel to her brother apart, "go thou down, and tell Arthur
the news.  I am afeared Lucrece hath some cause, not over good, for
wishing silence kept."

This is an atom: 
"Good lack!" cried the worried Squire.  "Wellnigh would I that every one
of my childre had been a lad!  These maidens be such changeable and
chargeable gear, I verily wis not what to do withal."

This is an atom: 
"Bide a while, Tom, till Jack hath been in the Court a year or twain;
maybe then I shall hear thee to wish that all had been maids."

This is an atom: 
Down to the parsonage trudged the puzzled and unhappy man, and found
that Arthur was at home.  He chatted for a short time with the family in
general, and then told the ladies, as a piece of news which he expected
to interest them, that his daughter Lucrece was about to be married.
Had he not intentionally kept his eyes from Arthur while he spoke, he
would have seen that the young man went white to the lips.

This is an atom: 
"Eh, _ma foi_!" said Mrs Rose.

This is an atom: 
"With whom shall she wed?" asked Mrs Tremayne.

This is an atom: 
"Sir Thomas, is that true?" was the last remark--in hoarse accents, from
Arthur.

This is an atom: 
"It is true, my lad.  Have I heard truly, that you would not have it
so?"

This is an atom: 
Mrs Tremayne looked at her son in a mixture of astonishment and dismay.
It had never occurred to her guileless, unsuspicious mind that the
object of his frequent visits to Enville Court could be any one but
Clare.

This is an atom: 
"Sir, I cry you mercy," said Arthur with some dignity.  "I do readily
acknowledge that I ought not to have left you in the dark.  But to speak
truth, it was she, not I, that would not you should be told."

This is an atom: 
"That would not have me told what, Arthur?"

This is an atom: 
"That I loved her," said Arthur, his voice slightly tremulous.  "And--
she _said_ she loved me."

This is an atom: 
"She told me that she had given thee no encouragement to speak to me."

This is an atom: 
"To speak with you--truth.  Whene'er I did approach that matter, she
alway deterred me from the same.  But if she hath told you, Sir, that
she gave me no encouragement to love and serve her, nor no hope of
wedding with her in due time,--why, then, she hath played you false as
well as me."

This is an atom: 
It was manifest that Arthur was not only much distressed, but also very
angry.

This is an atom: 
"And thou never spakest word to me, my son!" came in gentle tones of
rebuke from his mother.

This is an atom: 
"Ah, the young folks make not the confessor of the father nor the
mother," said Mrs Rose smiling, and shaking her head.  "It were the
better that they did it, Arthur."

This is an atom: 
"Mother, it was not my fault," pleaded Arthur earnestly.  "I would have
spoken both to you and to Sir Thomas here, if she had suffered me.  Only
the very last time I urged it on her--and that no further back than this
last week--she threatened me to have no further dealing with me, an' I
spake to either of you."

This is an atom: 
"Often-times," observed Mrs Rose thoughtfully, "the maidens love not
like the mothers, _mon cheri_."

This is an atom: 
"God have mercy!" groaned poor Sir Thomas, who was not least to be
pitied of the group.  "I am afeared Rachel hath the right.  Lucrece hath
not been true in this matter."

This is an atom: 
"There is no truth in her!" cried Arthur bitterly.  "And for the matter
of that, there is none in woman!"

This is an atom: 
"_Le beau compliment_!" said his grandmother, laughing.

This is an atom: 
His mother looked reproachfully at him, but did not speak.

This is an atom: 
"And Rachel saith there is none in man," returned Sir Thomas with grim
humour.  "Well-a-day! what will the world come to?"

This is an atom: 
These little pebbles in her path did not seem to trouble the easy
smoothness of Lucrece's way.  She prepared her trousseau with her
customary placidity; debated measures and trimmings with her aunt as if
entirely deaf to that lady's frequent interpolations of wrath; consulted
Blanche on the style of her jewellery, and Clare on the embroidery of
her ruffs, as calmly as if there were not a shadow on her conscience nor
her heart.  Perhaps there was not.

This is an atom: 
Sir Piers took Jack down to London, and settled him in his post of
deputy gentleman usher to the Queen; and at the end of six months, he
returned to Enville Court for his marriage.  With lying words I argued
away the life of a fellow-creature, whom, whilst I uttered them, I half
believed to be innocent: and now, when I have attained all I desired,
and reached the summit of my hopes, the Almighty has sent him back
upon the earth to blast me with the sight. Three times this day--three
times this day! Again!
again!"--and as he spoke, his wild and dilated eyes fixed themselves
on one of the individuals that surrounded him.

This is an atom: 
"He is delirious," said they.

This is an atom: 
"No," said the stranger!

This is an atom: 
"What he says is true enough,--at least in part;" and bending over
the expiring man, he added, "May Heaven forgive you, Antoine de
Chaulieu!

This is an atom: 
I was not executed; one who well knew my innocence saved my life. I may
name him, for he is beyond the reach of the law now,--it was
Claperon, the jailer, who loved Claudine, and had himself killed
Alphonse de Bellefonds from jealousy.

This is an atom: 
An unfortunate wretch had been several years in the jail for a
murder committed during the frenzy of a fit of insanity.

This is an atom: 
Long confinement had reduced him to idiocy. To save my life Claperon
substituted the senseless being for me, on the scaffold, and he was
executed in my stead.

This is an atom: 
He has quitted the country, and I have been a vagabond on the face
of the earth ever since that time.

This is an atom: 
At length I obtained, through the assistance of my sister, the
situation of concierge in the HÃ´tel Marboeuf, in the Rue Grange
BateliÃ¨re.

This is an atom: 
I entered on my new place yesterday
  evening, and was desired
  to awaken the gentleman on the third
  floor at seven o'clock.
  The suddenness of this appeal would have startled any one less calm and
self-controlled than the Reverend Robert Tremayne, who was taking off
his surplice in the vestry after morning prayers one Wednesday, when
this unexpected announcement reached him through the partially open
door.  But it was not the Rector's habit to show much emotion of any
kind, whatever he might feel.

This is an atom: 
"Pray you, come forward," he said quietly, in answer to the challenge.

This is an atom: 
The door, pushed wide open by the person without, revealed a handsome
old man, lithe and upright still,--whose hair was pure white, and his
brown eyes quick and radiant.  He marched in and seated himself upon the
settle, grasping a stout oaken stick in both hands, and gazing up into
the Rector's face.  His dress, no less than his manners, showed that
notwithstanding the blunt and eccentric nature of his greeting, he was
by birth a gentleman.

This is an atom: 
"And wherein hold you not with me, Sir, I pray you?" inquired Mr
Tremayne with some amusement.

This is an atom: 
"In your tolerating of evil opinion."

This is an atom: 
"I cry you mercy.  What evil opinion have I tolerated?"

This is an atom: 
"If you will tolerate men which hold evil opinions, you must needs
tolerate evil opinion."

This is an atom: 
"I scantly see that."

This is an atom: 
"Maybe you see this?" demanded the stranger, pulling a well-worn Bible
from a capacious pocket.

This is an atom: 
"My sight is sharp enough for so much," returned Mr Tremayne
good-naturedly.

This is an atom: 
"Well, and I tell you," said the stranger, poising the open Bible
between his hands, "there is no such word as toleration betwixt the two
backs of this book!"

This is an atom: 
The two backs of the book were brought together, by way of emphasising
the assertion, with a bang which might almost have been heard to the
parsonage.

This is an atom: 
"There is no such _word_, I grant you."

This is an atom: 
"No, Sir!--and there is no such thing."

This is an atom: 
"That hangeth, I take it, on what the word is held to signify."

This is an atom: 
"Shall I tell you what it signifieth?"

This is an atom: 
"Pray you, so do."

This is an atom: 
"Faint-heartedness, Sir!--weakness--recreancy--cowardliness--shamedness
of the truth!"

This is an atom: 
"An ill-sounding list of names," said Mr Tremayne quietly.  "And one of
none whereof I would by my good-will be guilty.--Pray you, whom have I
the honour to discourse withal?"

This is an atom: 
"A very pestilent heretic, that Queen Mary should have burned, and
forgat."

This is an atom: 
"She did not that with many," was the significant answer.

This is an atom: 
"She did rare like to it with a lad that I knew in King Edward's days,
whose name was Robin Tremayne."

This is an atom: 
"Master Underhill, my dear old friend!" cried the Rector, grasping his
visitor's hand warmly.  "I began these two minutes back to think I
should know those brown eyes, but I might not set a name thereto all at
once."

This is an atom: 
"Ha! the `pestilent heretic' helped thee to it, I reckon!" replied the
guest laughing.  "Ay, Robin, this is he thou knewest of old time.  We
will fight out our duello another time, lad.  I am rare glad to see thee
so well-looking."

This is an atom: 
"From what star dropped you, Master Underhill? or what fair wind blew
you hither?"

This is an atom: 
"I am dropped out of Warwickshire, lad, if that be a star; and I came
hither of a galloway's back (but if he were the wind, 'twas on the
stillest night of the year!)  And how goes it with Mrs Thekla?  I saw
her last in her bride's gear."

This is an atom: 
"She will be rarely glad to see you, old friend; and so, I warrant you,
will our mother, Mistress Rose.  Will you take the pain to go with me to
mine house?--where I will ensure you of a good bed and a rare welcome."

This is an atom: 
"Wilt thou ensure me of twain, lad?" asked the old man, with a comic
twinkle in his eyes.

This is an atom: 
"Twain!  What, which of all my small ancient friends be with you?--Ay,
and that as hearty as to yourself.--Is it Hal or Ned?"

This is an atom: 
"Thou art an ill guesser, Robin: 'tis neither Ned nor Hal.  Thy _small_
friends, old lad, be every man and woman of them higher than their
father.  Come, let us seek the child.  I left her a-poring and posing
over one of the tombs in the church.--What, Eunice!--I might as well
have left my staff behind as leave her."

This is an atom: 
It was plainly to be perceived, by the loud call which resounded through
the sacred edifice, that Mr Underhill was not fettered by any
superstitious reverence for places.  A comely woman answered the call,--
in years about thirty-seven, in face particularly bright and pleasant.
The last time that Mr Tremayne had seen her, Eunice Underhill was about
as high as the table.

This is an atom: 
"And doth Mistress Rose yet live?" said her father, as they went towards
the parsonage.  "She must be a mighty old grandame now.  And all else be
gone, as I have heard, that were of old time in the Lamb?"

This is an atom: 
"All else, saving Barbara Polwhele,--you mind Barbara, the chamber--
maiden?--and Walter's daughter, Clare, which is now a maid of twenty
years."

This is an atom: 
"Ah, I would fain see yon lass of little Walter's.  What manner of wife
did the lad wed?"

This is an atom: 
"See her--ask not me," said the Rector smiling.

This is an atom: 
"Now, how read I that?  Which of the Seven Sciences hath she lost her
way in?"

This is an atom: 
"In no one of them all."

This is an atom: 
"Come, I will ask Mrs Thekla."

This is an atom: 
Mr Tremayne laughed.

This is an atom: 
"You were best see her for yourself, as I cast no doubt you soon will.
How long time may we hope to keep you?"

This is an atom: 
"Shall you weary of us under a month?"

This is an atom: 
Mr Underhill was warmly enough assured that there was no fear of any
such calamity.

This is an atom: 
Most prominent of his party--which was Puritan of the Puritans--was
Edward Underhill of Honyngham, the Hot Gospeller.  His history was a
singular one.  Left an heir and an orphan at a very early age, he had
begun life as a riotous reveller.  Soon after he reached manhood, God
touched his heart--by what agency is not recorded.  Then he "fell to
reading the Scriptures and following the preachers,"--throwing his whole
soul into the service of Christ, as he had done before into that of
Satan.  Had any person acquainted with the religious world of that day
been asked, on the outbreak of Queen Mary's persecution, to name the
first ten men who would suffer, it is not improbable that Edward
Underhill's name would have been found somewhere on the list.  But, to
the astonishment of all who knew his decided views, and equally decided
character, he had survived the persecution, with no worse suffering than
a month spent in Newgate, and a tedious illness as the result.  Nor was
this because he had either hidden his colours, or had struck them.
Rather he kept his standard flying to the breeze, and defied the foe.
No reason can be given for his safety, save that still the God of Daniel
could send His angel and shut the lions' mouths, that they should do His
prophets no hurt.

This is an atom: 
On the accession of Elizabeth, Underhill returned for a short time to
his London home in Wood Street, Cheapside; but die soon went back to the
family seat in Warwickshire, where he had since lived as a country
squire.  [Note 1.]

This is an atom: 
"Yet these last few months gone have I spent in London," said he, "for
my Hal [name true, character imaginary] would needs have me.  Now,
Robin, do thou guess what yon lad hath gat in his head.  I will give
thee ten shots."

This is an atom: 
"No easy task, seeing I ne'er had the good fortune to behold him.  What
manner of lad is he?"

This is an atom: 
"Eunice?" said her father, referring the question to her.

This is an atom: 
Eunice laughed.  "Hal is mighty like his father, Master Tremayne.  He
hath a stout will of his own, nor should you quickly turn him thence."

This is an atom: 
"Lo you, now, what conditions doth this jade give me!" laughed
Underhill.  "A stubborn old brute, that will hear no reason!"

This is an atom: 
"Hal will not hear o'ermuch, when he is set on aught," said Eunice.

This is an atom: 
"Well," said Mr Tremayne thoughtfully, "so being, I would guess that he
had set his heart, to be Archbishop of Canterbury, or else Lord Privy
Seal."

This is an atom: 
"_Ma foi_!" interposed Mrs Rose, "but I would guess that no son of Mr
Underhill should tarry short of a king.  Mind you not, _hermano_, that I
did once hear you to say that you would not trust your own self, had you
the chance to make your Annette a queen?"

This is an atom: 
"Dear heart, Mistress Rose!  I would the lad had stayed him at nought
worser.  Nay, he is not for going up the ladder, but down.  Conceive
you, nought will serve him but a journey o'er seas, and to set him up a
home in the Queen's Majesty's country of Virginia--yea, away in the
plantations, amongst all the savages and wild beasts, and men worser
than either, that have been of late carried thither from this land, for
to be rid of them.  `Come, lad,' said I to him, `content thee with
eating of batatas [the Spanish word of which _potato_ is a corruption]
and drinking of tobacco [smoking tobacco was originally termed
_drinking_ it], and leave alone this mad fantasy.'  But not he, in good
sooth!  Verily, for to go thither as a preacher and teacher, with hope
to reform the ill men,--that had been matter of sore peril, and well to
be thought on; yet would I not have said him nay, had the Lord called
him to it;--but to make his _home_!"

This is an atom: 
And Mr Underhill stopped short, as if words were too weak adequately to
convey his feelings.

This is an atom: 
"Maybe the Lord hath called him to that, old friend," said the Rector.
"His eyes be on Virginia, no less than England."

This is an atom: 
"God forbid I should deny it!  Yet there is such gear as tempting the
Lord.  For my part,--but la!  I am an old man, and the old be less
venturesome than the young,--yet for me, I see not what should move a
man to dwell any whither out of his own country, without he must needs
fly to save his life."

This is an atom: 
"Had all men been of your mind," observed Mr Tremayne with a smile,
"there had ne'er been any country inhabited save one, until men were
fairly pushed thence by lack of room."

This is an atom: 
"Well!--and wherefore should any quit home until he be pushed out?"

This is an atom: 
"Ask at Hal," said the Rector laughing.

This is an atom: 
"No have I so?  Yea, twenty times twice told: but all I may win from the
young ne'er-do-well is wise saws that the world must be peopled (why so,
I marvel?),--and that there is pleasure in aventure (a deal more, I
reckon, in keeping of one's carcase safe and sound!)--and that some men
must needs dwell in strange lands, and the like.  Well-a-day! wherefore
should they so?  Tell me that, Robin Tremayne."

This is an atom: 
"I will, old friend, when mine amaze is o'er at hearing of such words
from one Ned Underhill."

This is an atom: 
"Amaze!--what need, trow?"

This is an atom: 
"But little need, when one doth call to mind that the most uncommon of
all things is consistency.  Only when one hath been used for forty years
and more to see a man (I name him not) ever foremost in all perilous
aventure, and thrusting him forward into whatsoever danger there were as
into a bath of rosewater, 'tis some little surprise that taketh one to
hear from the self-same party that 'tis never so much sweeter to keep
safe and sound at home."

This is an atom: 
Mr Underhill threw his head back, and indulged in a hearty peal of
laughter.

This is an atom: 
"On my word, Robin, thou ticklest me sore!  But what, lad!--may a man
not grow prudent in his old age?"

This is an atom: 
"By all manner of means, or in his youth no less; but this will I say,
that the last prudent man I looked to set eyes on should bear the name
of Underhill."

This is an atom: 
"Well-a-day!  Here is Eunice made up of prudence."

This is an atom: 
"She taketh after her mother, trow," replied the Rector dryly.

This is an atom: 
"Come, I'll give o'er, while I have some bones left whole.--And what
thinkest, lad, of the outlook of matters public at this time?"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, what think you, that have been of late in London?"

This is an atom: 
"Robin," said Mr Underhill gravely, "dost mind, long years gone, when
King Edward his reign was well-nigh o'er, the ferment men's minds gat in
touching the succession?"

This is an atom: 
"_Eh, la belle journee_!" said Mrs Rose waggishly.  "I do well mind the
ferment _you_ were in, Mr Underhill, and how you did push your Queen
Mary down all the throats of your friends: likewise how sweetly she did
repay you, bidding you for a month's visit to her palace of Newgate!
Pray you, shall it be the same again, _hermano_?"

This is an atom: 
"Dear heart!  What a memory have you, Mistress Rose!" said Mr
Underhill, with another hearty laugh.  "It shall scantly be Newgate
again, metrusteth: the rather, since there is no Queen Mary to thrust
adown your throats--thank the Lord for that and all other His mercies.
He that we may speak of is no Papist, whatso else; but I mistake
greatly, Robin, if somewhat the same matter shall not come o'er again,
should it please God to do a certain thing."

This is an atom: 
Mr Underhill spoke thus vaguely, having no wish to finish his days on
the gallows; as men had done ere now, for little more than a hint that
the reigning Sovereign might not live for ever.

This is an atom: 
"And when the ferment come, under what flag must we look for you, Mr
Underhill?" asked.  Mrs Tremayne.

This is an atom: 
"Well," said he, "Harry Eighth left a lad and two lasses, and we have
had them all.  But Harry Seventh left likewise a lad and two lasses; and
we have had the lad, but ne'er a one of the lasses."

This is an atom: 
"Both these lasses be dead," responded the Rector.

This is an atom: 
"They be so.  But the first left a lad and a lass; and that lad left a
lass, and that lass left a lad--which is alive and jolly."

This is an atom: 
This meant, that Queen Margaret of Scotland, elder sister of Henry the
Eighth, had issue King James the Fifth, whose daughter was Mary Queen of
Scots, and her son was James the Sixth, then living.

This is an atom: 
"You count the right lieth there?" queried Mr Tremayne.

This is an atom: 
Mr Underhill nodded his head decidedly.

This is an atom: 
"And is--yonder party--well or ill affected unto the Gospellers?--how
hear you?"

This is an atom: 
"Lutheran to the back-bone--with no love for Puritans, as men do now
begin to call us Hot Gospellers."

This is an atom: 
"Thus is the Queen, mecounteth: and we have thriven well under her, and
have full good cause to thank God for her."

This is an atom: 
"Fifty years gone, Robin--when she was but a smatchet [a very young
person]--I said that lass would do well.  There is a touch of old Hal in
her--not too much, but enough to put life and will into her."

This is an atom: 
"There shall scantly be that in him."

This is an atom: 
"Nay, I'll not say so much.  Meg had a touch of Hal, too.  'Twas ill
turning her down one road an' she took the bit betwixt her teeth, and
had a mind to go the other.  There was less of it in Mall, I grant you.
And as to yon poor luckless loon, Mall's heir,--if he wit his own mind,
I reckon 'tis as much as a man may bargain for.  England ne'er loveth
such at her helm--mark you that, Robin.  She may bear with them, but she
layeth no affiance in them."

This is an atom: 
Mr Underhill's hearers knew that by the poor luckless loon, he meant
Edward Seymour, Lord Beauchamp, the representative of the Princess Mary,
younger sister of Henry the Eighth.  He was heir of England under
Henry's will, and might, if he had chosen it, have been a very
formidable opponent of King James.

This is an atom: 
"There was trial made, in King Harry's days," said the Rector
thoughtfully, "to join the two Crowns of England and Scotland, by
marrying of King Edward, that then was Prince, with their young Queen
Mary."

This is an atom: 
"Well-a-day!--what changes had been, had that matter come to
perfection!"

This is an atom: 
"It were a mighty great book, friend, that should be writ, were all set
down that might have happened if things had run other than they have
done.  But I pray you, what outlook is now for the Gospellers--or
Puritans, if they be so called--these next few years?  Apart from the
Court--be they in good odour in London, or how?"

This is an atom: 
"Be they in good odour in Heaven, you were better to ask.  What is any
great town but a sink of wickedness?  And when did ill men hold good men
in esteem?"

This is an atom: 
"Ah, Mr Underhill, but there is difficulty beside that," said Mrs
Rose, shaking her head.  "Wherefore, will you tell me, cannot the good
men be content to think all the same thing, and not go quarrel, quarrel,
like the little boys at play?"

This is an atom: 
"So they should, Mistress Rose!--so they should!" said Mr Underhill
uncompromisingly.  "What with these fantasies and sectaries and
follies--well-a-day! were I at the helm, there should be ne'er an
opinion save one."

This is an atom: 
"That is the very thing Queen Mary thought," said Mr Tremayne, looking
amused.

This is an atom: 
"Dear heart! what will the lad say next?" demanded Mr Underhill in a
surprised tone.

This is an atom: 
"'Tis truth, old friend.  See you not that to keep men of one opinion,
the only way is to slay them that be of the contrary?  Living men must
differ.  Only the dead ne'er wrangle touching aught."

This is an atom: 
"Eh, Robin, man!  `Live peaceably with all men.'"

This is an atom: 
"`As much as lieth in you.'  Paul was wiser than you, saving your
presence."

This is an atom: 
"But, Robin, my son," said Mrs Rose, "I would not say only, for such
matters as men may differ in good reason.  They cannot agree on the
greater things, _mon cheri_,--nay, nor on the little, littles no more.--
Look you, Mr Underhill, we have in this parish a man that call himself
a Brownist--I count he think the brown the only colour that is right; if
he had made the world, all the flowers should be brown, and the leaves
black: eh, _ma foi_! what of a beautiful world to live in!--_Bien_! this
last May Day, Sir Thomas Enville set up the maypole on the green.
`Come, Master,' he said to the Brownist, `you dance round the
maypole?'--`Nay, nay,' saith he, `it savoureth of Popery.'  `Well,'
quoth he, `then you come to prayer in the church!  There is nothing
against that, I trow?'--`Good lack, nay!' saith he, `'tis an idle form.
I cannot pray without the Spirit aid me; and the Spirit will not be
bounden down unto dead forms.'  And so, Mr Underhill, they fall to
wrangling.  Now, is it not sad?  Not only they will not take their
pleasure together, but they will not say their prayers together no more.
Yet they all look to meet in Heaven.  They will not wrangle and quarrel
there, I trow?  Then why can they not be at peace these few days the
sooner?"

This is an atom: 
This was a long speech for Mrs Rose.

This is an atom: 
"Well, to speak truth," said Mr Underhill, "I could find in mine heart
to cry `Hail, fellow!' to your Brownist over the maypole: though I see
not wherein it savoureth of Popery, but rather of Paganism.  Howbeit, as
I well know, Popery and Paganism be sisters, and dwell but over the way
the one from the other.  But as to the Common Prayer being but a form,
and that dead,--why, I pray you, what maketh it a dead form save the
dead heart of him that useth the same?  The very Word of God is but a
dead thing, if the soul of him that readeth it be dead."

This is an atom: 
A certain section of the laity are earnestly petitioning the clergy for
"a hearty service."  Could they make a more absurd request?  The heart
is in the worshipper, not in the service.  And who can bring his heart
to it but himself?

This is an atom: 
"_Ma foi_!" said Mrs Rose, with a comical little grimace, "but indeed I
did think, when we were set at rest from the Queen Mary and her
burnings, that we could have lived at peace the ones with the others."

This is an atom: 
"Then which counted you to be rid of, Mistress Rose--the childre of God
or the childre of the devil?.  So long as both be in the world, I reckon
there'll not be o'er much peace," bluntly replied Underhill.

This is an atom: 
"Mind you what my dear father was used to say," asked Mr
Tremayne,--"`Afore the kingdom must come the King'?  Ah, dear friends,
we have all too little of Christ.  `We shall be satisfied,' and we shall
be of one mind in all things, only when we wake up `after His
likeness.'"

This is an atom: 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an atom: 
Clare Avery and Eunice Underhill struck up a warm friendship.  Eunice
[name and dates true, character imaginary] was one of the few women who
keep "the dew of their youth," and in freshness, innocence, and
ignorance of this evil world, she was younger than many girls not half
her age.  Her simplicity put Clare at ease, while her experience of life
awoke respect.  Clare seized her opportunity one day, while taking a
long walk with Eunice, to obtain the opinion of the latter on the point
which still interested her, and compare it with that of Mrs Tremayne.
Why it was easier to talk to Eunice than to those at home, Clare could
not decide.  Perhaps, had she discovered the reason, she might not have
found it very flattering to her self-love.

This is an atom: 
"Mistress Eunice, think you it easy to be content with small gear?"

This is an atom: 
"You would say with lack of goods?" asked Eunice.

This is an atom: 
"Nay; but with the having to deal with petty, passing matter, in the
stead of some noble deed that should be worthy the doing."

This is an atom: 
"I take you now, Mistress Clare.  And I can feel for your perplexity,
seeing I have known the same myself."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, you have so?" responded Clare eagerly.

This is an atom: 
"Ay, I have felt as though the work set me to do were sheer waste of
such power and knowledge as God had given unto me; and have marvelled (I
would speak it with reverence) what the Lord would be at, that He thus
dealt with me.  Petty things--mean things--little passing matter, as you
said, that none shall be the better for to-morrow; wherefore must I do
these?  I have made a pudding, maybe; I have shaken up a bed; I have cut
an old gown into a kirtle.  And to-morrow the pudding shall be eaten,
and the bed shall lack fresh straw, and ere long the gown shall be worn
to rags.  But I shall live for ever.  Wherefore should a soul be set to
such work which shall live for ever?"

This is an atom: 
"Ay,--you know!" said Clare, drawing a deep breath of satisfaction.
"Now tell me, Mistress Eunice, what answer find you to this question?
Shall it be with you, as with other, that these be my tasks at school?"

This is an atom: 
"That is verily sooth, Mistress Clare; yet there is another light
wherein I love the better to look thereat.  And it is this: that in this
world be no little things."

This is an atom: 
"What would you say, Mistress Eunice?  In good sooth, it seemeth me the
rather, there be few great."

This is an atom: 
"I cry you mercy," said Eunice, with her bright smile.  "Lo' you,--'tis
after this fashion.  The pudding I have made a man shall eat, and
thereby be kept alive.  This man shall drop a word to another, which one
passing by shall o'erhear,--on the goodness and desirableness of
learning, I will say.  Well, this last shall turn it o'er in his mind,
and shall determine to send his lad to school, and have him well
learned.  Time being gone, this lad shall write a book, or shall preach
a sermon, whereby, through the working of God's Spirit, many men's
hearts shall be touched, and led to consider the things that belong unto
their peace.  Look you, here is a chain; and in this great chain one
little link is the pudding which I made, twenty years gone."

This is an atom: 
"But the man could have eaten somewhat else."

This is an atom: 
"Soothly; but he did not, you see."

This is an atom: 
"Or another than you could have made the pudding."

This is an atom: 
"Soothly, again: but I was to make it."

This is an atom: 
Clare considered this view of the case.

This is an atom: 
"All things in this world, Mistress Clare, be links in some chain.  In
Dutchland [Germany], many years gone now, a young man that studied in an
university there was caught in an heavy thunderstorm.  He grew sore
affrighted; all his sins came to his mind: and he prayed Saint Anne to
dispel the storm, promising that he would straightway become a monk.
The storm rolled away, and he suffered no harm.  But he was mindful of
his vow, and he became a monk.  Well, some time after, having a spare
half-hour, he went to the library to get him a book.  As God would have
it, he reached down a Latin Bible, the like whereof he had ne'er seen
aforetime.  Through the reading of this book--for I am well assured you
know that I speak of Luther--came about the full Reformation of religion
which, thanks be to God! is now spread abroad.  And all this cometh--to
speak after the manner of men--in that one Martin was at one time
affrighted with the thunder; and, at another time, reached him down a
book.  Nay, Mistress Clare--in God's world be no little things!"

This is an atom: 
"Mistress Eunice, in so saying, you make life to look a mighty terrible
thing, and full of care."

This is an atom: 
"And is life not a most terrible thing to them that use it not aright?
But for them that do trust them unto God's guidance, and search His Word
to see what He would have them do, and seek alway and above all things
but to do His will,--it may be life is matter for meditation, yea, and
watchfulness; but methinks none for care.  God will see to the chain:
'tis He, not we, that is weaver thereof.  We need but to be careful,
each of his little link."

This is an atom: 
"My links be wearyful ones!" said Clare with a little sigh.  "'Tis to
cut, and snip, and fit, and sew, and guard, and mend.  My cousin Lysken
dealeth with men and women, I with linen and woollen.  Think you it
strange that her work should seem to me not only the nobler, but the
sweeter belike?"

This is an atom: 
"Methinks I have seen Mistress Lysken to deal pretty closely with linen
and woollen, sithence Father and I came hither," said Eunice smiling.
"But in very deed, Mistress Clare, 'tis but nature that it so should
seem unto you.  Yet did it ever come into your mind, I pray you, that we
be poor judges of that which is high and noble?  I marvel if any save
Christ and Gabriel e'er called John Baptist a great man.  Yet he was
great in the sight of the Lord.  Yea, that word, `more than a prophet'
was the very accolade of the King of the whole world.  You know,
Mistress Clare, that if the Queen's Majesty should call a man `Sir
Robert,' though it were but a mistake, and he no knight, that very word
from her should make him one.  And the King of Heaven can make no
mistake; His great men be great men indeed.  Now whether would you
rather, to be great with men, or with God?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, with God, undoubtedly!" said Clare shyly.

This is an atom: 
"It seemeth me," said Eunice, knitting her brows a little, "there be
three questions the which your heart may ask himself touching your work.
_Wherefore_ do I this?  You will very like say, Because you be bidden.
Good.  But then--_How_ do I this?--is it in the most excellent way I
can?  And yet again, _For whom_ do I this?  That last lieth deepest of
all."

This is an atom: 
"Why, I do it for my mother and Aunt Rachel," said Clare innocently.

This is an atom: 
"Good.  But wherefore not, henceforward, do it for God?"

This is an atom: 
"For God, Mistress Eunice!"

This is an atom: 
"'Tis the true touchstone of greatness.  Nought can be little that a man
doth for God; like as nought can be great that a man doth but for
himself."

This is an atom: 
"Lysken can work for God," said Clare thoughtfully; "but I, who do but
draw needles in and out--"

This is an atom: 
"Cannot draw them for God?  Nay, but Paul thought not so.  He biddeth
you `whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do _all_ to the
glory of God.'  But mind you, only the very best work is to His glory:
that is to say, only _your_ very best.  He measures not Mall's work by
Jane's, but he looketh at the power of both, and judgeth if they have
wrought their best or no.  Jane may have finished the better piece of
work, but if Mall have wrought to her utmost, and Jane not so, then
Mall's work shall take first rank, and Jane's must fall behind."

This is an atom: 
"That is a new thought unto me, Mistress Eunice--that I can do such work
for God.  I did indeed account that I could be patient under the same,
for to please Him: and I could have thought that the saving of a child
from drowning, or the leading of a ship to battle, and so forth, might
be done as unto God: but to cut and sew and measure!"

This is an atom: 
"I would 'twere not a new thought to many another," answered Eunice.
"But I guess we can sew well or ill; and we can cut carefully or
carelessly; and we can measure truly or untruly.  Truth is no little
matter, Mistress Clare; neither is diligence; nor yet a real, honest,
hearty endeavouring of one's self to please the Lord, who hath given us
our work, in every little thing.  Moreover, give me leave to tell you,--
you may be set a great work, and you may fail to see the greatness
thereof.  I mind me, when I was something younger than you be, and my
brother Hal was but a little child, he fell into sore danger, and should
belike have been killed, had none stretched out hand to save him.  Well,
as the Lord in His mercy would have it, I saw his peril, and I ran and
snatched up the child in the very nick of time.  There was but an
half-minute to do it.  And at afterward, men praised me, and said I had
done a great thing.  But think you it bare the face of a great thing to
me, as I was in the doing thereof?  Never a whit.  I ne'er tarried to
think if it were a great thing or a small: I thought neither of me nor
of my doing, but alonely of our Hal, and how to set him in safety.  They
said it was a great matter, sith I had risked mine own life.  But, dear
heart!  I knew not that I risked aught--I ne'er thought once thereon.
Had I known it, I would have done the same, God helping me: but I knew
it not.  Now, whether was this a great thing or a small?"

This is an atom: 
"I have no doubt to say, a great."

This is an atom: 
"Maybe, Mistress Clare, when you and I shall stand--as I pray God we
may!--among the sheep at the right hand of Christ our Saviour,--when the
books be opened, and the dead judged according to that which is written
of them,--He may pick out some little petty deed (to our eyes), and may
say thereof, This was a great thing in My sight.  And it may be, too,
that the deeds we counted great He shall pass by without any mention.
Dear heart, let us do the small deeds to our utmost, and the great are
sure to follow.  `He that is faithful in that which is least, is
faithful also in much.'  And you know what He saith touching that poor
cup of cold water, which assuredly is but a right small thing to give.
Think you, if the Queen's Highness were passing here but now, and should
drop her glove, and you picked up the same and offered it to Her
Grace,--should you e'er forget it?  I trow not.  Yet what a petty
matter--to pick up a dropped glove!  `Ah, but,' say you, `It was the
Queen's glove--that wrought the difference.'  Verily so.  Then set the
like gilding upon your petty deeds.  It is the King's work.  You have
wrought for the King.  Your guerdon is His smile--is it not enough?--and
your home shall be within His house for ever."

This is an atom: 
"Ay!" said Clare, drawing a long sigh--not of care: "it is enough,
Mistress Eunice."

This is an atom: 
"And He hath no lack of our work," added Eunice softly.  "It is _given_
to us to do, like as it was given unto Peter and John to suffer.
Methinks he were neither a good child nor a thankful, that should refuse
to stretch forth hand for his Father's gift."

This is an atom: 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an atom: 
Note 1.  I have not been able to ascertain the true date of Underhill's
death, but he was living on the 6th of March 1568.  (Rot. Pat., 10
Elizabeth, Part Two.)

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

This is an atom: 
GENTLEMAN JACK.

This is an atom: 
"He is transformed, And grown a gallant of the last edition."

This is an atom: 
_Massinger_.

This is an atom: 
Jack's letters from London were exuberant.  He was delighted with his
new phase of existence.  He had made some most advantageous friendships,
and was in hopes of obtaining a monopoly, which would bring him in about
a hundred a year.  In the meantime, he begged that his father would
remember that life at Court was a very costly affair; and perhaps he
would be so good as to send him a little more money.  Half-a-dozen
letters of this description passed, and Jack was liberally supplied with
such an amount as his father anticipated that he might reasonably want.
But at the end of about two years came a much more urgent epistle.  Jack
was sorry to say that he had been unavoidably compelled to go into debt.
No blame was to be attached to him in the matter.  He had not incurred
the obligation of a penny for anything beyond the barest necessaries; he
hoped his father would not imagine that he had been living
extravagantly.  But he wished Sir Thomas to understand that he really
had not a suspicion of the inevitable expenses of Court life.  The sums
which he had been so good as to remit were a mere drop in the ocean of
Jack's necessities.

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas replied, without any expression of displeasure, that if his
son could get leave of absence sufficient to pay a visit to Lancashire,
he would be glad to see him at home, and he desired that he would bring
all his bills with him.

This is an atom: 
The answer to this letter was Jack himself, who came home on an autumn
evening, most elaborately attired, and brimful of news.

This is an atom: 
A fresh punishment had been devised for felony--transportation to the
colonies among the savages.  The Spaniards were finally and completely
expelled from the Dutch provinces.  A Dutchman had made the
extraordinary discovery that by an ingenious arrangement of pieces of
glass, of certain shapes, at particular distances, objects far off could
be made to seem nearer and larger.  The Queen was about to send out a
commercial expedition to India--the first--from which great things were
expected.  There was a new proclamation against Jesuits and "seminary
priests."  All these matters naturally enough, with Jack's personal
adventures, occupied the first evening.

This is an atom: 
The next morning, Sir Thomas asked to see the bills.  Jack brought out a
tolerably large package of documents, which he presented to his father
with a graceful reverence.

This is an atom: 
"I do ensure you, Sir, that I have involved me for nought beyond the
barest necessities of a gentleman."

This is an atom: 
His father opened and perused the first bill.

This is an atom: 
"`One dozen of shirts at four pound the piece.'  Be those, my lad, among
the barest necessities?"

This is an atom: 
"Of a gentleman, Sir," said Jack.

This is an atom: 
"Four pound, Brother!  Thou must mean four shillings," cried Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"'Tis writ four pound," calmly returned Sir Thomas.

This is an atom: 
"Good lack Jack!" said Rachel, turning to her nephew.  "Were there
angels for buttons all the way down?"

This is an atom: 
"The broidery, Aunt--the broidery!" returned Jack.  "Four pound is a
reasonable charge enough.  Marry, I do ensure you, my sometime Lord of
Leicester was wont to pay ten pound the piece for his shirts."

This is an atom: 
"I would I had been his shirt-maker!" said Rachel.  "'Twould have built
up my fortune."

This is an atom: 
"What wist thou touching broidery, Jack?" demanded Lady Enville, with
her silvery laugh.

This is an atom: 
"Go to!" said Sir Thomas, taking up the next bill.  "`Five score of silk
stockings, broidered, with golden clocks [Note 1], twenty-six and
eight-pence the pair.'--Those be necessaries, belike, Jack?"

This is an atom: 
"Assuredly, Sir.  White, look you--a pair the day, or maybe two."

This is an atom: 
"Ha!" said his father.  "`Item, one short coat, guarded with budge
[lambskin], and broidered in gold thread, 45 pounds.--Item, one long
gown of tawny velvet, furred with pampilion [an unknown species of fur],
and guarded with white lace, 66 pounds, 13 shillings, 4 pence.'--
Necessaries, Jack?"

This is an atom: 
"Mercy preserve us!" ejaculated Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"Good lack, Sir Thomas!--the lad must have gear!" urged his step-mother.

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas laid down the bills.

This is an atom: 
"Be so good, Jack, as to tell me the full figures of these counts?"

This is an atom: 
"Good sooth, Sir!  I have not added them," replied Jack in a
contemptuous tone.  "A gentleman is ne'er good at reckoning."

This is an atom: 
"He seems to be reasonable good at spending," said his father.  "But how
much, Jack, dost guess they may all come to?"

This is an atom: 
"Really, Sir, I cannot say."

This is an atom: 
"Go to--give a guess."

This is an atom: 
"Marry--somewhere about five thousand pound, it may be."

This is an atom: 
According to the equivalent value of money in the present day, Jack's
debts amounted to about seventy-five thousand pounds.  His father's
yearly income was equal to about six thousand.

This is an atom: 
"How lookest thou to pay this money, Jack?" asked Sir Thomas, in a tone
of preternatural calmness which argued rather despair than lack of
annoyance.

This is an atom: 
"Well, Sir, there be two or three fashions of payment," returned Jack,
airily.  "If you cannot find the money--"

This is an atom: 
"I cannot, in very deed, lad."

This is an atom: 
"Good," answered Jack quite complacently.  "Then--if I win not the
monopoly--"

This is an atom: 
"The monopoly would not pay thy debts under fifty years, Jack; not if
thou gavest every penny thereof thereto, and hadst none fresh to pay.
How about that, lad?"

This is an atom: 
"Of course I must live like a gentleman, Sir," said Jack loftily.  "Then
the next way is to win the grant of a wardship."

This is an atom: 
This way of acquiring money is so entirely obsolete that it needs
explanation.  The grant of a wardship meant that some orphan heir of a
large inheritance was placed in the care of the grantee, who was obliged
to defray out of the heir's estate the necessary expenses of his
sustenance and education, but was free to apply all the surplus to his
own use until the heir was of age.  When the inheritance was large,
therefore, the grant was a considerable boon to the guardian.

This is an atom: 
"And supposing that fail thee?"

This is an atom: 
"Well, then--if the worst come to the worst--I can but wed an heir,"
remarked Jack with serenity.

This is an atom: 
"Wed an estate, thou meanest, Jack."

This is an atom: 
"Of course, Sir.  The woman must come with it, I reckon.  That I cannot
help."

This is an atom: 
"Marry come up!" exclaimed Rachel.  "Thou art a very man.  Those be
right the man's ways.  `The woman must come with it,' forsooth!  Jack,
my fingers be itching to thrash thee."

This is an atom: 
"Such matters be done every day, Aunt," observed Jack, smiling
graciously,--not with reference to the suggested reward of his misdeeds.

This is an atom: 
"Black sin is done every day, lad.  I wis that without thy telling.  But
that is no cause why thou shouldst be the doer of it."

This is an atom: 
"Nay, Aunt Rachel!" retorted Jack, in the same manner.  "'Tis no sin to
wed an heir."

This is an atom: 
"It was a sin, when I was a child, to tell lies.  Maybe that is altered
now," said Rachel dryly.

This is an atom: 
"What lies, Aunt Rachel?" asked Jack laughing.

This is an atom: 
"Is it no lie, Jack, to lead a woman into believing that thou lovest
_her_, when, if she plucked her purse out of her pocket and gave it
thee, thou wert fully content, and shouldst ask no more?"

This is an atom: 
"You have old-fashioned notions, Aunt Rachel," said Jack, still
laughing.

This is an atom: 
"Jack!  I do trust thou wilt not wed with any but one of good degree.
Let her be a knight's daughter, at the least--a lord's were all the
better," said his step-mother.

This is an atom: 
"But touching these debts, Jack," resumed his father.  "Suppose thou
shouldst fail to wed thine heir,--how then?"

This is an atom: 
"Then, Sir, I shall trust to redeem the money at play."

This is an atom: 
Every man of substance--not a Puritan--was at that time a gamester.

This is an atom: 
"And how, if that fail?"

This is an atom: 
"They can't all fail, Sir!" said Jack lightly.

This is an atom: 
"My lad!" replied His father earnestly, "I did an ill deed when I sent
thee to London."

This is an atom: 
"Dear heart, Sir!" exclaimed Jack, just suppressing a much stronger
ejaculation, "I do ensure you, you never did a wiser thing."

This is an atom: 
"Then my life hath been one of sore folly," answered his father.

This is an atom: 
"I alway told thee thou shouldst come to wrack," added his aunt.

This is an atom: 
"Nay, now, what wrack have I come to?" returned Jack with a graceful
flourish of his hands.  "Call you it wrack to have a good post in the
Queen's Majesty's house, with hope of a better, maybe, when it please
God?--or, to be well [stand well, be on good terms] with many honourable
gentlemen, and heirs of good houses, throughout all England?--or, to
have the pick of their sisters and cousins, when it liketh me to wed?"

This is an atom: 
"They shall have a jolly picking that pick out thee!" growled Aunt
Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"Or to have open door of full many honourable houses,--and good credit,
that there is not a craftsman in London that should not count it honour
to serve me with such goods as I might choose?" pursued Jack.

This is an atom: 
"A mighty barren honour, Jack, on thine own showing."

This is an atom: 
"Jack!" interposed Sir Thomas, who had seemed deep in thought for a
minute, "tell me honestly,--of this five thousand pound, if so be, how
much was lost at the dice?"

This is an atom: 
"Why, Sir!--you did not count I should reckon my debts of honour?"

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas groaned within himself.

This is an atom: 
"Debts of honour!" cried Rachel.  "What, be there a parcel more?"

This is an atom: 
"These be trade-debts, Aunt!" said Jack, with an injured air,--"debts
that I can defray or leave, as it may stand with conveniency.  My debts
of honour must be paid, of course!--I looked to your bounty, Sir, for
that.  They be not much--but a light thousand or twelve hundred pound, I
take it."

This is an atom: 
That is to say, about 15,000 pounds to 18,000 pounds.

This is an atom: 
"Jack!" said his father, "dost remember thou hast two sisters yet
unwed?"

This is an atom: 
"One, Sir, under your good pleasure," replied Jack suavely.

This is an atom: 
"Two," gravely repeated Sir Thomas.  "I will set no difference betwixt
Blanche and Clare.  And they be to portion, lad; and we have all to
live.  I cannot pay thy debts of honour and see to these likewise.  And,
Jack, the trade-debts, as thou callest them, must come first."

This is an atom: 
"Sir!" exclaimed Jack aghast.

This is an atom: 
"I say, the trade-debts must stand first," repeated his father firmly.

This is an atom: 
"A gentleman never puts his trade-debts before his debts of honour,
Sir!" cried Jack in a tone of intense disgust mixed with amazement.

This is an atom: 
"I know not what you gentlemen of the Court may account honour nor
honesty, Sir," replied Sir Thomas, now sternly; "but I am a plain honest
man, that knows nought of Court fashions, for the which His good
providence I thank God.  And if it be honest to heap up debt that thou
hast no means of paying to thy certain knowledge, then I know not the
signification of honesty."

This is an atom: 
"But I must play, Sir!" replied Jack--in the tone with which he might
have said, "I must breathe."

This is an atom: 
"Then thou must pay," said Sir Thomas shortly.

This is an atom: 
"Must play, quotha!" interjected Rachel.  "Thou must be a decent lad,--
that is all the must I see."

This is an atom: 
"Come, be not too hard on the lad!" pleaded Lady Enville, fanning
herself elegantly.  "Of course he must live as other young men."

This is an atom: 
"That is it, Madam!" responded Jack eagerly, turning to his welcome
ally.  "I cannot affect singularity--'tis not possible."

This is an atom: 
"Of course not," said Lady Enville, who quite agreed with Jack's
sentiments, as women of her type generally do.

This is an atom: 
"Thou canst affect honesty, trow," retorted Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"Sir," said Jack, earnestly addressing his father, "I do entreat you,
look on this matter in a reasonable fashion."

This is an atom: 
"That is it which I would fain do, Jack."

This is an atom: 
"Well, Sir,--were I to put my trade-debts before my debts of honour, all
whom I know should stamp me as no gentleman.  They should reckon me some
craftsman's son that had crept in amongst them peradventure."

This is an atom: 
"Good lack!" said his step-mother and aunt together,--the former in
dismay, the latter in satire.

This is an atom: 
"I am willing that any should count me no gentleman, if he find me not
one," answered his father; "but one thing will I never do, and that is,
give cause to any man to reckon me a knave."

This is an atom: 
"But, Sir, these be nought save a parcel of beggarly craftsmen."

This is an atom: 
"Which thou shouldst have been, had it so pleased God," put in Aunt
Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"Aunt," said Jack loftily, "I was born a gentleman; and under your good
leaves, a gentleman I do mean to live and die."

This is an atom: 
"Thou hast my full good leave to live and die a gentleman, my lad," said
his father; "and that is, a man of honour, truth, and probity."

This is an atom: 
"And 'tis no true man, nor an honourable, that payeth not his just
debts," added Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"I cry thee mercy, Rachel; a gentleman never troubleth him touching
debts," observed Lady Enville.

This is an atom: 
"In especial unto such like low companions as these," echoed Jack.

This is an atom: 
"Well!--honesty is gone out of fashion, I reckon," said Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"Only this will I say, Sir," resumed Jack with an air of settling
matters: "that if you will needs have my trade-debts defrayed before my
debts of honour, you must, an't like you, take them on yourself.  I will
be no party to such base infringement of the laws of honour."

This is an atom: 
"Good lack, lad!  Thou talkest as though thy father had run into debt,
and was looking unto thee to defray the charges!  'Tis tother way about,
Jack.  Call thy wits together!" exclaimed his aunt.

This is an atom: 
"Well, Aunt Rachel, you seem determined to use me hardly," said Jack,
with an air of reluctant martyrdom; "but you will find I harbour no
malice for your evil conception of mine intents."

This is an atom: 
To see this Jack, who had done all the mischief and made everybody
uncomfortable, mount on his pedestal and magnanimously forgive them, was
too much for Rachel's equanimity.

This is an atom: 
"Of all the born fools that e'er gat me in a passion, Jack, thou art
very king and captain!  I would give my best gown this minute thou wert
six in the stead of six-and-twenty--my word, but I would leather thee!
I would whip thee till I was dog-weary, whatever thou shouldst be.  The
born patch [fool]!--the dolt [dunce]!--the lither loon [idle,
good-for-nothing fellow]!--that shall harbour no malice against me
because--he is both a fool and a knave!  If thou e'er hadst any sense,
Jack (the which I doubt), thou forgattest to pack it up when thou
earnest from London.  Of all the long-eared asses ever I saw--"

This is an atom: 
Mistress Rachel's diatribe came to a sudden close, certainly not from
the exhaustion of her feelings, but from the want of suitable words
wherein to express them.

This is an atom: 
"Aunt!" said Jack, still in an injured tone, "would you have me to
govern myself by rule and measure, like a craftsman?"

This is an atom: 
"Words be cast away on thee, Jack: I will hold my peace.  When thy
brains be come home from the journey they be now gone, thou canst give
me to wit, an' it like thee."

This is an atom: 
"I marvel," murmured Sir Thomas absently, "what Master Tremayne should
say to all this."

This is an atom: 
"He!" returned Jack with sovereign scorn.  "He is a Puritan!"

This is an atom: 
"He is a good man, Jack.  And I doubt--so he keep out of ill company--
whether Arthur shall give him the like care," said his father sighing.

This is an atom: 
"Arthur!  A sely milksop, Sir, that cannot look a goose in the face!"

This is an atom: 
But sunwards, lo you! how it towers sheer up, a world of Mountains, the
diadem and centre of the mountain region!

This is an atom: 
A hundred and a hundred savage peaks, in the last light of Day; all
glowing, of gold and amethyst, like giant spirits of the wilderness;
there in their silence, in their solitude, even as on the night
when Noah's Deluge first dried!

This is an atom: 
Beautiful, nay solemn, was the sudden aspect to our Wanderer.

This is an atom: 
He gazed over those stupendous masses with wonder, almost with longing
desire; never till this hour had he known Nature, that she was
One, that she was his Mother and divine.

This is an atom: 
And as the ruddy glow was fading into clearness in the sky, and the
Sun had now departed, a murmur of Eternity and Immensity, of Death
and of Life, stole through his soul; and he felt as if Death and
Life were one, as if the Earth were not dead, as if the Spirit of
the Earth had its throne in that splendor, and his own spirit were
therewith holding communion.

This is an atom: 
"The spell was broken by a sound of carriage-wheels. Emerging from the
hidden Northward, to sink soon into the hidden Southward, came a gay
Barouche-and-four: it was open; servants and postilions wore wedding
favors: that happy pair, then, had found each other, it was their
marriage evening!

This is an atom: 
Few moments brought them near: _Du Himmel_! It was Herr Towgood
and--Blumine!

This is an atom: 
With slight unrecognizing salutation they passed me; plunged down amid the
neighboring thickets, onwards, to Heaven, and to England; and I,
in my friend Richter's words, _I remained alone, behind them, with
the Night_."

This is an atom: 
Were it not cruel in these circumstances, here might be the place
to insert an observation, gleaned long ago from the great
_Clothes-Volume_, where it stands with quite other intent: "Some
time before Small-pox was extirpated," says the Professor, "there
came a new malady of the spiritual sort on Europe: I mean the
epidemic, now endemical, of View-hunting.

This is an atom: 
Poets of old date, being privileged with Senses, had also enjoyed
external Nature; but chiefly as we enjoy the crystal cup which holds
good or bad liquor for us; that is to say, in silence, or with slight
incidental commentary: never, as I compute, till after the _Sorrows
of Werter_, was there man found who would say: Come let us make a
Description!

This is an atom: 
Having drunk the liquor, come let us eat the glass!

This is an atom: 
Of which endemic the Jenner is unhappily still to seek." Too true!

This is an atom: 
We reckon it more important to remark that the Professor's Wanderings,
so far as his stoical and cynical envelopment admits us to clear
insight, here first take their permanent character, fatuous or not.

This is an atom: 
That Basilisk-glance of the Barouche-and-four seems to have withered up
what little remnant of a purpose may have still lurked in him: Life
has become wholly a dark labyrinth; wherein, through long years,
our Friend, flying from spectres, has to stumble about at random,
and naturally with more haste than progress.

This is an atom: 
Foolish were it in us to attempt following him, even from afar, in
this extraordinary world-pilgrimage of his; the simplest record of
which, were clear record possible, would fill volumes.

This is an atom: 
Hopeless is the obscurity, unspeakable the confusion. He glides from country
to country, from condition to condition; vanishing and reappearing,
no man can calculate how or where.

This is an atom: 
Through all quarters of the world he wanders, and apparently through
all circles of society.

This is an atom: 
If in any scene, perhaps difficult to fix geographically, he settles
for a time, and forms connections, be sure he will snap them
abruptly asunder.

This is an atom: 
Let him sink out of sight as Private Scholar (_Privatsirender_), living
by the grace of God in some European capital, you may next find him as
Hadjee in the neighborhood of Mecca. It is an inexplicable Phantasmagoria,
capricious, quick-changing; as if our Traveller, instead of limbs and
highways, had transported himself by some wishing-carpet, or
Fortunatus' Hat.

This is an atom: 
The whole, too, imparted emblematically, in dim multifarious tokens
(as that collection of Street-Advertisements); with only some touch
of direct historical notice sparingly interspersed: little light-islets
in the world of haze!

This is an atom: 
So that, from this point, the Professor is more of an enigma than
ever.

This is an atom: 
In figurative language, we might say he becomes, not indeed a spirit,
yet spiritualized, vaporized. Fact unparalleled in Biography: The river
of his History, which we have traced from its tiniest fountains, and
hoped to see flow onward, with increasing current, into the ocean,
here dashes itself over that terrific Lover's Leap; and, as a
mad-foaming cataract, flies wholly into tumultuous clouds of spray!

This is an atom: 
Low down it indeed collects again into pools and plashes; yet only at a
great distance, and with difficulty, if at all, into a general
stream.

This is an atom: 
To cast a glance into certain of those pools and plashes, and trace
whither they run, must, for a chapter or two, form the limit of
our endeavor.

This is an atom: 
For which end doubtless those direct historical Notices, where they
can be met with, are the best.

This is an atom: 
Nevertheless, of this sort too there occurs much, which, with our
present light, it were questionable to emit.

This is an atom: 
Teufelsdrockh vibrating everywhere between the highest and the lowest
levels, comes into contact with public History itself. For example, those
conversations and relations with illustrious Persons, as Sultan
Mahmoud, the Emperor Napoleon, and others, are they not as yet rather
of a diplomatic character than of a biographic? The Editor, appreciating
the sacredness of crowned heads, nay perhaps suspecting the possible
trickeries of a Clothes-Philosopher, will eschew this province for the
present; a new time may bring new insight and a different duty.

This is an atom: 
If we ask now, not indeed with what ulterior Purpose, for there was none,
yet with what immediate outlooks; at all events, in what mood of mind,
the Professor undertook and prosecuted this world-pilgrimage,--the
answer is more distinct than favorable. "A nameless Unrest," says he,
"urged me forward; to which the outward motion was some momentary
lying solace.

This is an atom: 
Whither should I go? My Loadstars were blotted out; in that canopy of
grim fire shone no star.

This is an atom: 
Yet forward must I; the ground burnt under me; there was no rest for the
sole of my foot. I was alone, alone!
Ever too the strong inward longing shaped Phantasms for itself: towards
these, one after the other, must I fruitlessly wander. A feeling I had,
that for my fever-thirst there was and must be somewhere a healing
Fountain.

This is an atom: 
To many fondly imagined Fountains, the Saints' Wells of these days,
did I pilgrim; to great Men, to great Cities, to great Events: but
found there no healing.

This is an atom: 
In strange countries, as in the well-known; in savage deserts, as in
the press of corrupt civilization, it was ever the same: how could your
Wanderer escape from--_his own Shadow_?
Nevertheless still Forward!

This is an atom: 
I felt as if in great haste; to do I saw not what. From the depths of my
own heart, it called to me, Forwards!

This is an atom: 
The winds and the streams, and all Nature sounded to me, Forwards!
_Ach Gott_, I was even, once for all, a Son of Time."
From which is it not clear that the internal Satanic School was
still active enough?

This is an atom: 
He says elsewhere: "The _Enchiridion of Epictetus_ I had ever with
me, often as my sole rational companion; and regret to mention that
the nourishment it yielded was trifling."

This is an atom: 
Thou foolish Teufelsdrockh How could it else?

This is an atom: 
Hadst thou not Greek enough to understand thus much: _The end of
Man is an Action, and not a Thought_, though it were the noblest?

This is an atom: 
"How I lived?" writes he once: "Friend, hast thou considered the 'rugged
all-nourishing Earth,' as Sophocles well names her; how she feeds the
sparrow on the house-top, much more her darling, man? While thou stirrest
and livest, thou hast a probability of victual. My breakfast of tea has
been cooked by a Tartar woman, with water of the Amur, who wiped her
earthen kettle with a horse-tail. I have roasted wild eggs in the
sand of Sahara; I have awakened in Paris _Estrapades_ and Vienna
_Malzleins_, with no prospect of breakfast beyond elemental liquid.

This is an atom: 
That I had my Living to seek saved me from Dying,--by suicide. In our
busy Europe, is there not an everlasting demand for Intellect, in
the chemical, mechanical, political, religious, educational,
commercial departments?

This is an atom: 
In Pagan countries, cannot one write Fetishes? Living!
Little knowest thou what alchemy is in an inventive Soul; how, as
with its little finger, it can create provision enough for the body
(of a Philosopher); and then, as with both hands, create quite other
than provision; namely, spectres to torment itself withal."

This is an atom: 
Poor Teufelsdrockh! Flying with Hunger always parallel to him; and a
whole Infernal Chase in his rear; so that the countenance of Hunger
is comparatively a friend's!

This is an atom: 
Thus must he, in the temper of ancient Cain, or of the modern Wandering
Jew,--save only that he feels himself not guilty and but suffering
the pains of guilt,--wend to and fro with aimless speed.

This is an atom: 
Thus must he, over the whole surface of the Earth (by footprints),
write his _Sorrows of Teufelsdrockh_; even as the great Goethe, in
passionate words, had to write his _Sorrows of Werter_, before the
spirit freed herself, and he could become a Man.

This is an atom: 
Vain truly is the hope of your swiftest Runner to escape "from his
own Shadow"!

This is an atom: 
Nevertheless, in these sick days, when the Born of Heaven first
descries himself (about the age of twenty) in a world such as ours,
richer than usual in two things, in Truths grown obsolete, and
Trades grown obsolete,--what can the fool think but that it is all
a Den of Lies, wherein whoso will not speak Lies and act Lies, must
stand idle and despair?

This is an atom: 
Whereby it happens that, for your nobler minds, the publishing of some
such Work of Art, in one or the other dialect, becomes almost
a necessity.

This is an atom: 
For what is it properly but an Altercation with the Devil, before
you begin honestly Fighting him?

This is an atom: 
Your Byron publishes his _Sorrows of Lord George_, in verse and in
prose, and copiously otherwise: your Bonaparte represents his
_Sorrows of Napoleon_ Opera, in an all-too stupendous style; with
music of cannon-volleys, and murder-shrieks of a world; his
stage-lights are the fires of Conflagration; his rhyme and recitative
are the tramp of embattled Hosts and the sound of falling Cities.

This is an atom: 
--Happier is he who, like our Clothes-Philosopher, can write such
matter, since it must be written, on the insensible Earth, with his
shoe-soles only; and also survive the writing thereof!

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER VII. THE EVERLASTING NO.

This is an atom: 
Under the strange nebulous envelopment, wherein our Professor
has now shrouded himself, no doubt but his spiritual nature is nevertheless
progressive, and growing: for how can the "Son of Time," in any case,
stand still?

This is an atom: 
We behold him, through those dim years, in a state of crisis, of
transition: his mad Pilgrimings, and general solution into aimless
Discontinuity, what is all this but a mad Fermentation; wherefrom the
fiercer it is, the clearer product will one day evolve itself?

This is an atom: 
Such transitions are ever full of pain: thus the Eagle when he
moults is sickly; and, to attain his new beak, must harshly dash
off the old one upon rocks.

This is an atom: 
What Stoicism soever our Wanderer, in his individual acts and motions,
may affect, it is clear that there is a hot fever of anarchy and misery
raging within; coruscations of which flash out: as, indeed, how could
there be other? Have we not seen him disappointed, bemocked of Destiny,
through long years? All that the young heart might desire and pray for
has been denied; nay, as in the last worst instance, offered and then
snatched away. Ever an "excellent Passivity;" but of useful, reasonable
Activity, essential to the former as Food to Hunger, nothing granted:
till at length, in this wild Pilgrimage, he must forcibly seize
for himself an Activity, though useless, unreasonable.

This is an atom: 
Alas, his cup of bitterness, which had been filling drop by drop,
ever since that first "ruddy morning" in the Hinterschlag Gymnasium,
was at the very lip; and then with that poison-drop, of the Towgood-and-Blumine
business, it runs over, and even hisses over in a deluge of foam.

This is an atom: 
He himself says once, with more justness than originality: "Men is,
properly speaking, based upon Hope, he has no other possession but
Hope; this world of his is emphatically the Place of Hope."

This is an atom: 
What, then, was our Professor's possession?

This is an atom: 
We see him, for the present, quite shut out from Hope; looking not
into the golden orient, but vaguely all round into a dim copper
firmament, pregnant with earthquake and tornado.

This is an atom: 
Alas, shut out from Hope, in a deeper sense than we yet dream of!
For, as he wanders wearisomely through this world, he has now lost all
tidings of another and higher.

This is an atom: 
Full of religion, or at least of religiosity, as our Friend has since
exhibited himself, he hides not that, in those days, he was wholly
irreligious: "Doubt had darkened into Unbelief," says he; "shade
after shade goes grimly over your soul, till you have the fixed,
starless, Tartarean black."

This is an atom: 
To such readers as have reflected, what can be called reflecting,
on man's life, and happily discovered, in contradiction to much
Profit-and-Loss Philosophy, speculative and practical, that Soul
is not synonymous with Stomach; who understand, therefore, in our
Friend's words, "that, for man's well-being, Faith is properly the
one thing needful; how, with it, Martyrs, otherwise weak, can
cheerfully endure the shame and the cross; and without it, Worldlings
puke up their sick existence, by suicide, in the midst of luxury:"
to such it will be clear that, for a pure moral nature, the loss
of his religious Belief was the loss of everything.

This is an atom: 
Unhappy young man! All wounds, the crush of long-continued Destitution,
the stab of false Friendship and of false Love, all wounds in thy
so genial heart, would have healed again, had not its life-warmth
been withdrawn.

This is an atom: 
Well might he exclaim, in his wild way: "Is there no God, then; but
at best an absentee God, sitting idle, ever since the first Sabbath,
at the outside of his Universe, and _see_ing it go? Has the word Duty
no meaning; is what we call Duty no divine Messenger and Guide, but a
false earthly Phantasm, made up of Desire and Fear, of emanations
from the Gallows and from Doctor Graham's Celestial-Bed?

This is an atom: 
Happiness of an approving Conscience!

This is an atom: 
Did not Paul of Tarsus, whom admiring men have since named Saint, feel
that _he_ was 'the chief of sinners;' and Nero of Rome, jocund in
spirit (_wohlgemuth_), spend much of his time in fiddling?

This is an atom: 
Foolish Wordmonger and Motive-grinder, who in thy Logic-mill hast an earthly
mechanism for the Godlike itself, and wouldst fain grind me out Virtue
from the husks of Pleasure,--I tell thee, Nay! To the unregenerate
Prometheus Vinctus of a man, it is ever the bitterest aggravation of
his wretchedness that he is conscious of Virtue, that he feels
himself the victim not of suffering only, but of injustice.

This is an atom: 
What then?

This is an atom: 
Is the heroic inspiration we name Virtue but some Passion; some
bubble of the blood, bubbling in the direction others _profit_ by?

This is an atom: 
I know not: only this I know, If what thou
  namest Happiness be our true aim, then are we all astray.

This is an atom: 
With Stupidity and sound Digestion man may front much.

This is an atom: 
But what, in these dull unimaginative days, are the terrors of Conscience
to the diseases of the Liver! Not on Morality, but on Cookery, let us
build our stronghold: there brandishing our frying-pan, as censer,
let us offer sweet incense to the Devil, and live at ease on the
fat things he has provided for his Elect!"

This is an atom: 
He must needs have his
broidered shirts, his Italian ruff, well-set, broidered, and starched;
his long-breasted French doublet, well bombasted [padded]; his hose,--
either French, Gally, or Venetian; his corked Flemish shoes of white
leather; his paned [slashed and puffed with another colour or material]
velvet breeches, guarded with golden lace; his satin cloak, well
broidered and laced; his coats of fine cloth, some forty shillings the
yard; his long, furred gown of Lukes' [Lucca] velvet; his muff, Spanish
hat, Toledo rapier; his golden and jewelled ear-rings; his stays--"

This is an atom: 
A few ejaculations, such as "Good lack!" and "Well-a-day!" had been
audible from Aunt Rachel as the list proceeded; but Sir Thomas kept
silence until the mention of this last article, which was in his eyes a
purely feminine item of apparel.

This is an atom: 
"Nay, Jack, nay, now!  Be the men turning women in the Court?"

This is an atom: 
"And the women turning men, belike," added Rachel.  "The twain do
oft-times go together."

This is an atom: 
"My good Sir!" returned Jack, with amused condescension.  "How shall a
gentleman go about a sorry figure, more than a gentlewoman?"

This is an atom: 
"Marry come up!" interposed Rachel.  "If the gentleman thou hast scarce
finished busking be not a sorry figure, I ne'er did see the like."

This is an atom: 
"Stays, ear-rings, muffs!" repeated Sir Thomas under his breath.
"Belike a fan, too, Jack?--and a pomander?--and masks?--and gloves?"

This is an atom: 
"Gloves, without doubt, sir; and they of fair white Spanish leather,
wrought with silk.  Masks, but rarely; nor neither fans nor pomanders."

This is an atom: 
"Not yet, I reckon.  Dear heart! what will the idle young gallants be
a-running after the next?  We shall have them twisting rats' tails in
their hair, or riding in coaches."

This is an atom: 
"I ensure you, Sir, many gentlemen do even now ride in coaches.  'Tis
said the Queen somewhat misliketh the same."

This is an atom: 
"Dear heart!" said Sir Thomas again.

This is an atom: 
"And now, Sir, you can well see all these must needs be had--"

This is an atom: 
"Beshrew me, Jack, if I see aught of the sort!"

This is an atom: 
"All I see," retorted Rachel, "is, if they be had, they must be paid
for."

This is an atom: 
"Nay, worry not the lad thus!" was softly breathed from Lady Enville's
corner.  "If other gentlemen wear such gear, Jack must needs have the
same also.  You would not have him mean and sorry?"  [shabby.]

This is an atom: 
"Thou wouldst have him a scarlet and yellow popinjay!" said Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"I would not have him mean, Orige," replied Sir Thomas significantly.

This is an atom: 
"Well, Sir,--all said, we come to this," resumed Jack in his airy
manner.  "If these bills must needs be paid--and so seem you to say--how
shall it be?  Must I essay for the monopoly?--or for a wardship?--or for
an heir?--or shall I rather trust to my luck at the dice?"

This is an atom: 
"Buy aught but a living woman!" said Rachel, with much disgust.

This is an atom: 
"The woman is nought, Aunt.  'Tis her fortune."

This is an atom: 
"Very good.  I reckon she will say, `The man is naught.'  And she'll
speak truth."

This is an atom: 
Rachel was playing, as many did in her day, on the similarity of sound
between "nought," nothing, and "naught," good-for-nothing.

This is an atom: 
"Like enough," said Jack placidly.

This is an atom: 
"I will spare thee what money I can, Jack," said his father sighing.
"But I do thee to wit that 'twill not pay thy debt--no, or the half
thereof.  For the rest, I must leave thee to find thine own means: but,
Jack!--let them be such means that an honest man and true need not be
'shamed thereof."

This is an atom: 
"Oh!--of course, sir," said Jack lightly.

This is an atom: 
"Jack Feversham!" asked Sir Thomas, turning suddenly to his young
visitor, "supposing this debt were thine, how shouldst thou pay it?"

This is an atom: 
"God forbid it were!" answered Feversham gravely.  "But an' it were,
sir, I would pay the same."

This is an atom: 
"At the dice?" grimly inquired Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"I never game, my mistress."

This is an atom: 
"A monopoly?" pursued she.

This is an atom: 
"I am little like to win one," said Feversham laughingly.

This is an atom: 
"Or by wedding of an heir?"

This is an atom: 
"For the sake of her money?  Nay, I would think I did her lesser ill of
the twain to put my hand in her pocket and steal it."

This is an atom: 
"Then, whereby?" asked Sir Thomas, anxious to draw John out.

This is an atom: 
"By honest work, Sir, whatso I might win: yea, though it were the
meanest that is, and should take my life to the work."

This is an atom: 
"Making of bricks?" sneered Jack.

This is an atom: 
"I would not choose that," replied Feversham quietly.  "But if I could
earn money in no daintier fashion, I would do it."

This is an atom: 
"I despise mean-spirited loons!" muttered Jack, addressing himself to
the fire.

This is an atom: 
"So doth not God, my son," said his father quietly.

This is an atom: 
Blanche felt uncertain whether she did or not.  In fact, the state of
Blanche's mind just then was chaos.  She thought sometimes there must be
two of her, each intent upon pursuing a direction opposite to that of
the other.  Blanche was in the state termed in the Hebrew Old Testament,
"an heart and an heart."  She wished to serve God, but she also wanted
to please herself.  She was under the impression--(how many share it
with her!)--that religion meant just two things--giving up everything
that one liked, and doing everything that one disliked.  She did not
realise that what it really does mean is a change in the liking.  But at
present she was ready to accept Christ's salvation from punishment, if
only she might dispense with the good works which God had prepared for
her to walk in.

This is an atom: 
And when the heart is thus divided between God and self, it will be
found as a rule that, in all perplexities which have to be decided, self
carries the day.

This is an atom: 
The only result of the struggle in Blanche's mind which was apparent to
those around her was that she was very cross and disagreeable.  He who
is dissatisfied with himself can never be pleased with other people.

This is an atom: 
Ah, how little we all know--how little we can know, as regards one
another--of the working of that internal kingdom which is in every man's
breast!  A woman's heart may be crushed to death within her, and those
who habitually talk and eat and dwell with her may only suppose that she
has a headache.

This is an atom: 
And those around Blanche entirely misunderstood her.  Lady Enville
thought she was fretting over her crossed love, and lavished endless
pity and petting upon her.  Clare only saw, in a vague kind of way, that
something was the matter with her sister which she could not understand,
and let her alone.  Her Aunt Rachel treated her to divers acidulated
lectures upon the ingratitude of her behaviour, and the intensity with
which she ought to be ashamed of herself.  None of these courses of
treatment was exactly what Blanche needed; but perhaps the nipping north
wind of Aunt Rachel was better than the dead calm of Clare, and far
superior to the soft summer breeze of Lady Enville.

This is an atom: 
It was a bright, crisp, winter day.  The pond in the grounds at Enville
Court was frozen over, and Jack, declaring that no consideration should
baulk him of a slide, had gone down to it for that purpose.  John
Feversham followed more deliberately; and a little later, Clare and
Blanche sauntered down in the same direction.  They found the two Johns
sliding on the pond, and old Abel, the head gardener, earnestly adjuring
Master Jack to keep off the south end of it.

This is an atom: 
"Th' ice is good enough at this end; but 'tis a deal too thin o'er yon.
You'd best have a care, of you'll be in ere you know aught about it."

This is an atom: 
"Thou go learn thy gra'mmer!"  [teach thy grandmother] said Jack
scornfully.  "Hallo, maids!  Come on the ice--'tis as jolly as a play."

This is an atom: 
Clare smilingly declined, but Blanche stepped on the ice, aided by
Jack's hand, and was soon sliding away as lithely and merrily as
himself.

This is an atom: 
"Ay me! yonder goeth the dinner bell," said Blanche at last.  "Help me
back on the bank, Jack; I must away."

This is an atom: 
"Butter the dinner bell!" responded Jack.  "Once more--one grand slide,
Snowdrop."

This is an atom: 
This had been Jack's pet name for his youngest sister in childhood, and
he used it now when he was in a particularly good temper.

This is an atom: 
"Master!  Master! yo're comin' too near th' thin!" shouted old Abel.

This is an atom: 
Jack and Blanche, executing their final and most superb slide, heard or
cared not.  They came flying along the pond,--when all at once there was
a shriek of horror, and Jack--who was not able to stop himself--finished
the slide alone.  Blanche had disappeared.  Near the south end of the
great pond was a round jagged hole in the ice, showing where she had
gone down.

This is an atom: 
"Hold her up, Master, quick!" cried old Abel.  "Dunnot let her be sucked
under, as what happens!  Creep along to th' edge, and lay you down; and
when hoo comes to th' top, catch her by her gown, or her hure [hair], or
aught as 'll hold.  I'll get ye help as soon as I can;" and as fast as
his limbs would carry him, Abel hurried away.

This is an atom: 
Jack did not move.

This is an atom: 
"I shall be drowned!  I can't swim!" he murmured, with white lips, "I
would sure go in likewise."

This is an atom: 
Neither he nor Clare saw in the first moment of shocked excitement that
somebody else had been quicker and braver than they.

This is an atom: 
"I have her!" said John Feversham's voice, just a little less calm than
usual.  "I think I can keep her head above water till help cometh.  Jack
Enville, fetch a rope or a plank--quick!"

This is an atom: 
They saw then that Feversham was lying on his face on the ice, and
holding firmly to Blanche by her fair hair, thus bringing her face above
the water.

This is an atom: 
"O Jack, Jack!" cried Clare in an agony.  "Where is a rope or plank?"

This is an atom: 
Even in that moment, Jack was pre-eminently a gentleman--in his own
sense of the term.

This is an atom: 
"How should I know?  I am no serving-man."

This is an atom: 
Clare dashed off towards the house without another word.  She met Sir
Thomas at the garden gate, hastening out to ascertain the meaning of the
screams which had been heard.

This is an atom: 
"Father!--a rope--a plank!" she panted breathlessly.  "Oh, help!
Blanche is drowning!"

This is an atom: 
Before Clare's sentence was gasped out, Sim and Dick ran past, the one
with a plank, the other with a coil of rope, sent by Abel to the rescue.
Sir Thomas followed them at his utmost speed.

This is an atom: 
The sight which met his eyes at the pond, had it been less serious,
would have been ludicrous.  Feversham still lay on the ice, grasping
Blanche, who was white and motionless; while Jack, standing in perfect
safety on the bank, was favouring the hero with sundry scraps of cheap
advice.

This is an atom: 
"Hasten!" said Feversham in a low, constrained voice, when he heard help
coming.  "I am wellnigh spent."

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas was really angry with his son.  A few words of withering
scorn made that young gentleman--afraid of his father for the first
time--assist with his own courtly hands in pushing the plank across the
ice.

This is an atom: 
The relief reached those endangered just in time.

This is an atom: 
Blanche was carried home in her father's arms, and delivered to Rachel
to be nursed; while Feversham, the moment that he recognised himself to
be no longer responsible for her safety, fainted where he lay.  He was
borne to the house by Sim and Dick--Master Jack following in a leisurely
manner, with his gentlemanly hands in his pockets.

This is an atom: 
When all was safely over, Sir Thomas put his hand on Jack's shoulder.
For the first time that the father could remember, the son looked
slightly abashed.

This is an atom: 
"Jack, which was the coward?"

This is an atom: 
And Jack failed to answer.

This is an atom: 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an atom: 
John Feversham joined the party again at supper.  He looked very pale,
but otherwise maintained his usual imperturbable demeanour, though
scarcely seeming to like the expressions of admiration which were
showered upon him.

This is an atom: 
"Metrusteth, Jack," said Rachel cuttingly to her nephew, "next time thou
wilt do thy best not to mistake a hero for a coward.  I should not
marvel, trow, if the child's going on yon ice were some mischievous work
of thine."

This is an atom: 
"'Twas a gallant deed, in very sooth, Master Feversham,--without you can
swim," said Lady Enville faintly.  She had gone into hysterics on
hearing of the accident, and considered herself deserving of the deepest
commiseration for her sufferings.  "I am thankful Blanche wear but her
camlet."

This is an atom: 
"Canst thou swim, lad?" asked Sir Thomas of John.

This is an atom: 
"No," he answered quietly.

This is an atom: 
"Were you not afeared, Master Feversham?" said Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"Ay, a little--lest I should be full spent ere help could come.  But for
that I trusted God.  For aught else--nay: it was no time to think
thereof."

This is an atom: 
"Methinks, Jack Feversham," said Sir Thomas affectionately, "none shall
call thee a coward any more."

This is an atom: 
Feversham smiled back in answer.

This is an atom: 
"Sir Thomas," he said, "I fear God, and I love her.  This was God's
work, and her great peril.  How could I have held back?"

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas glanced at his son; but Jack was twirling his moustache, and
intently contemplating one of the stags' heads which decorated the hall.

This is an atom: 
After that day, there was a great change in Blanche Enville.  She had
come so near death, and that so suddenly, that she was sobered and
softened.  God in His mercy opened her eyes, and she began to ask
herself,--What is the world worth?  What, after all, is anything worth,
except to please God, and win His blessing, and inherit His glory?

This is an atom: 
Her opinion was changed, too, as it respected John Feversham.  There was
no possibility of mistaking him for a coward any longer.  And whatever
he had been, she could scarcely have failed to cherish some kindly
feeling towards the man who had risked his life for hers.

This is an atom: 
The two Johns left Enville Court together on the following Tuesday.  And
after reaching London, Jack began to write letters home pretty
regularly, for that time,--always gay, airy, and sanguine.

This is an atom: 
Jack's first letter conveyed the information that he was absolutely
certain of obtaining the monopoly.  Sir Christopher Hatton and Sir
Walter Raleigh had both promised their interest, and any thought of
failure after that was quite out of the question.

This is an atom: 
The second letter brought the news that Sir Christopher was very
ill--(in fact, he was dying)--and that, by some unfortunate mistake
(with Jack, any want of capacity to see his immense value, was always a
mistake), the monopoly had been granted to young Philip Hoby.  But there
was no reason for disappointment.  Jack had had an unusual run of good
luck that week at the gaming-table.  It was quite Providential.  For
Jack, like some other gentlemen of his day, dealt largely in religious
phrases, and did not trouble himself about religion in any other way.

This is an atom: 
The third letter stated that Jack had not been able to obtain the grant
of a wardship.  That was another unfortunate mistake.  But his good luck
as a gamester still kept up, and my Lord of 'Bergavenny was his very
good lord.  These items, also, were most Providential.

This is an atom: 
The fourth letter informed his father that all his difficulties were at
last surmounted.  Providence had rewarded his merits as they deserved.
He was on the eve of marriage.

This is an atom: 
"To whom?" asked Lady Enville, with languid curiosity.

This is an atom: 
"To seven thousand pounds," said Sir Thomas dryly; "that is as much as I
can make out of the lad's letter."

This is an atom: 
The fifth epistle condescended to rather mere detail.  Jack's _fiancee_
was the daughter of an Earl, and the niece by marriage of a Viscount.
She had a fortune of seven thousand pounds--that was the cream and
chorus of the whole.  But still it did not apparently occur to Jack that
his friends at home might be interested to know the name of his beloved.

This is an atom: 
"What must we call her?" asked Blanche.  "We know not her name."

This is an atom: 
"And we cannot say `Mistress Jack,' sith she hath a title," added Sir
Thomas.

This is an atom: 
"`My Lady Jack,'" laughingly suggested Rachel.

This is an atom: 
And "Lady Jack" the bride was dubbed from that day forth.

This is an atom: 
The sixth letter was longer in coming.  But when it came it was short
and sweet.  Jack's nuptials were to be solemnised on the following day,
and he and his bride would start three days later for Enville Court.
There was a general flutter through the family.

This is an atom: 
"Dear heart! how was Jack donned?  I would give a broad shilling to
know!" said Rachel satirically.  "In white satin, trow, at the very
least, with a mighty great F on his back, wrought in rubies."

This is an atom: 
"F, Aunt Rachel!" repeated Blanche innocently.  "You mean E, surely.
What should F spell?"

This is an atom: 
"Thou canst spell aught thou wilt therewith, child," said Rachel coolly,
as she left the room.

This is an atom: 
"Sir Thomas, I pray you of money," said Lady Enville, rousing up.  "We
have nought fit to show."

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas glanced at his wife's flowing satin dress, trimmed with
costly lace, and, like an unreasonable man, opined that it was quite
good enough for anything; "This!" exclaimed Lady Enville.  "Surely you
cannot mean it, Sir Thomas.  This gown is all rags, and hath been made
these four years."

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas contemplated the dress again, with a rather puzzled face.

This is an atom: 
"I see not a patch thereon, Orige.  Prithee, be all thy gowns rags?--and
be Clare and Blanche in rags likewise?"

This is an atom: 
"Of course--not fit to show," said the lady.

This is an atom: 
"It seemeth me, Orige, thou shouldst have had money aforetime.  Yet I
cannot wholly conceive it,--we went not to church in rags this last
Sunday, without somewhat ail mine eyes.  If we be going thus the next,
prithee lay out in time to avoid the same."

This is an atom: 
"Gramercy, Sir Thomas!--how do you talk!"

This is an atom: 
"Rachel," said her brother, as she entered, "how many new gowns dost
thou need to show my Lady Jack?"

This is an atom: 
"I lack no new gowns, I thank thee, Tom.  I set a new dowlas lining in
my camlet but this last week.  I would be glad of an hood, 'tis true,
for mine is well worn; but that is all I need, and a mark [13 shillings
and 4 pence] shall serve me."

This is an atom: 
"Then thy charges be less than Orige, for she ensureth me that all her
gowns be but rags, and so be Clare's, and the like by Blanche."

This is an atom: 
"Lack-a-daisy!" cried Rachel.  "Call me an Anabaptist, if she hath not
in her coffers two velvet gowns, and a satin, and a kersey, and three
camlets--to say nought of velvet kirtles and other habiliments!"

This is an atom: 
"My dear Rachel!--not one made this year!"

This is an atom: 
"My satin gown was made six years gone, Orige; and this that I bear
seven; and my camlet--well-a-day!--it may be ten."

This is an atom: 
"They be not fit to sweep the house in."

This is an atom: 
"Marry come up!--Prithee, Tom, set Orige up in tinsel.  But for Clare
and Blanche, leave me see to them.  Clare hath one gown was made this
year--"

This is an atom: 
"A beggarly say!"  [a coarse kind of silk, often used for curtains and
covering furniture] put in Lady Enville.

This is an atom: 
"And Blanche hath one a-making."

This is an atom: 
"A sorry kersey of twenty pence the yard!"

This is an atom: 
"Orige, prithee talk no liker a fool than thou canst help.  Our gowns be
right and--decent, according to our degree.  We be but common folks,
woman!  For me, I go not about to prink [make smart and showy] me in
cloth of gold,--not though Jack should wed all the countesses in
England.  If she love not me by reason of my gowns, she may hold me off
with the andirons.  I can do without her."

This is an atom: 
And away marched Rachel in high dudgeon.  "It is too bad of Rachel!"
moaned Lady Enville, lifting her handkerchief to tearless eyes.  "I
would have nought but to be decent and fit for our degree, and not to
shame us in the eyes of her that hath been in the Court.  I was ne'er
one to cast money right and left.  If I had but a new velvet gown, and a
fair kirtle of laced satin, and a good kersey for every day, and an
hood, and a partlet or twain of broidered work, and two or three other
small matters, I would ask no more.  Rachel would fain don us all like
scullery-maids!"

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas hated to see a woman weep; and above all, his wife--whom he
still loved, though he could no longer esteem her.

This is an atom: 
"Come, Orige,--dry thine eyes," he said pityingly.

This is an atom: 
He did not know, poor victim! that they required no drying.

This is an atom: 
"Thou shalt have what thou wouldst.  Tell me the sum thou lackest, and I
will spare it, though I cut timber therefor."

This is an atom: 
Which was equivalent, in his eyes, to the very last and worst of all
honest resources for raising money.

This is an atom: 
Lady Enville made a rapid calculation (with her handkerchief still at
her eyes), which ran much in this fashion:--

This is an atom: 
+========================================+======+
ÃVelvet dress - at least 40; say         Ã45 0 0Ã
+----------------------------------------+------+
ÃSatin kirtle - about                    Ã20 0 0Ã
+----------------------------------------+------+
ÃKersey dress                            Ã3 10 0Ã
+----------------------------------------+------+
ÃHood, best                              Ã 1 6 8Ã
+----------------------------------------+------+
ÃHood, second-rate                       Ã  13 4Ã
+----------------------------------------+------+
ÃFrontlet                                Ã   4 4Ã
+----------------------------------------+------+
ÃLawn for ruffs (embroidered at home) sayÃ   2 6Ã
+----------------------------------------+------+
ÃGloves, one dozen pairs, best quality   Ã   2 6Ã
+----------------------------------------+------+
ÃRibbon, 40 yards, various colours       Ã  13 4Ã
+----------------------------------------+------+
ÃMiscellaneous items, a good margin, say Ã 9 7 4Ã
+----------------------------------------+------+
ÃWhich makes a total of                  Ã80 0 0Ã
+========================================+======+

This is an atom: 
Without removing the signal of distress, her Ladyship announced that the
small sum of 80 pounds would satisfy her need: a sum equivalent to about
1200 pounds in our day.  Sir Thomas held his breath.  But he knew that
unless he had courage authoritatively to deny the fair petitioner,
argument and entreaty would alike be thrown away upon her.  And that
courage he was conscious he had not.

This is an atom: 
"Very well, Orige," he said quietly; "thou shalt have it."

This is an atom: 
But he ordered four fine oaks to be felled that evening.

This is an atom: 
"Clare, what lackest thou in the matter of raiment?" he asked when he
met her alone.

This is an atom: 
"If it liked your goodness to bestow on me a crown-piece, Father, I
would be very thankful," said Clare, blushing as if she thought herself
extravagant.  "I do lack gloves and kerchiefs."

This is an atom: 
"And what for thee, Blanche?" he asked in similar circumstances.

This is an atom: 
Before Blanche's eyes for a moment floated the vision of a new satin
dress and velvet hood.  The old Blanche would have asked for them
without scruple.  But the new Blanche glanced at her father's face, and
saw that he looked grave and worried.

This is an atom: 
"I thank you much, Father," she said.  "There is nought I do really
lack, without it were three yards of blue ribbon for a girdle."

This is an atom: 
This would cost about a shilling.  Sir Thomas smiled, blessed her, and
put a crown-piece in her hand; and Blanche danced down-stairs in her
delight,--evoked less by the crown-piece than by the little victory over
herself.  It was to her that for which a despot is recorded to have
longed in vain--a new pleasure.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

This is an atom: 
AFTER ALL.

This is an atom: 
"For perhaps the dreaded future
  Has less bitter than I think;
  The Lord may sweeten the waters
  Before I stoop to drink;
  Or if Marah must be Marah,
  He will stand beside the brink."

This is an atom: 
All was ready for the reception of the newcomers.  The hall at Enville
Court was gay with spring flowers, and fresh rushes were strewn over the
floor.  Sir Thomas and Dick had gone so far as Kirkham to meet the
visitors.  Lady Enville, attired in her new kersey, which had cost the
extravagant price of five shillings per yard, [Note 1] sat by the hall
fire.  Rachel, in the objectionable camlet, which had been declared too
shabby to sweep the house in, stood near the door; while Clare and
Blanche, dressed in their Sunday costume, were moving about the hall,
giving little finishing touches to things as they saw them needed.

This is an atom: 
"There be the horses!" said Blanche excitedly.

This is an atom: 
She was very curious to see her new sister.

This is an atom: 
In about ten minutes Sir Thomas entered, leading a masked lady by the
hand.  Jack came lounging behind, his hands in his pockets, after his
usual fashion.

This is an atom: 
"Our new daughter,--the Lady Gertrude Enville."  [A fictitious person.]

This is an atom: 
One glance, and Lady Enville almost fainted from pique.  Lady Gertrude's
travelling costume was grander than her own very best new velvet.
Violet velvet, of the finest quality, slashed in all directions, and the
slashes filled with puffings of rich pale buff satin; yards upon yards
of the costliest white lace, literally strewn upon the dress: rich
embroidery upon the most delicate lawn, edged with deep lace, forming
the ruff; a hood of black velvet, decorated with pearls and gold
passementerie; white leather shoes, wrought with gold; long worked
gloves of thick white kid,--muff, fan, mask--all complete.  As the bride
came up the hall, she removed her mask, and showed a long pale face,
with an unpleasant expression.  Her apparent age was about thirty.

This is an atom: 
"Give you good even, Madam!" she said, in a high shrill voice--not one
of those which are proverbially "an excellent thing in woman."

This is an atom: 
"These be your waiting gentlewomen?"

This is an atom: 
"These are my daughters," said Lady Enville--stiffly, for her; the
mistake had decidedly annoyed her.

This is an atom: 
"Ah!"  And the bride kissed them.  Then turning to Rachel,--"This, I
account, is the lady mistress?"

This is an atom: 
("That camlet!" said Lady Enville to herself, deeply vexed.)

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas introduced her gravely,--"My sister."

This is an atom: 
Lady Gertrude's bold dark eyes scanned Rachel with an air of contempt.
Rachel, on her part, quite reciprocated the feeling.

This is an atom: 
"You see, Niece, we keep our velvets for Sundays hereaway," she said in
her dry way.

This is an atom: 
The bride answered by an affected little laugh, a kiss, and a
declaration that travelling ruined everything, and that she was not fit
to be seen.  At a glance from Lady Enville, Clare offered to show
Gertrude to her chamber, and they went up-stairs together.  Jack
strolled out towards the stable.

This is an atom: 
"Not fit to be seen!" gasped poor Lady Enville.  "Sir Thomas, what can
we do?  In the stead of eighty pound, I should have laid out eight
hundred, to match her!"

This is an atom: 
"Bear it, I reckon, my dear," said he quietly.

This is an atom: 
"Make thy mind easy, Orige," scornfully answered Rachel.  "I will lay my
new hood that her father made his fortune in some manner of craft, and
hath not been an Earl above these two years.  Very ladies should not
deal as she doth."

This is an atom: 
Meanwhile, above their heads, the bride was putting Clare through her
catechism.

This is an atom: 
"One of you maidens is not in very deed Sir John's sister.  Which is
it?"

This is an atom: 
"_Sir_ John?" repeated Clare in surprise.

This is an atom: 
"Of course.  Think you I would have wedded a plain Master?  I caused my
father to knight him first.--Which is it?"

This is an atom: 
"That am I," said Clare.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, you?  Well, you be not o'er like him.  But you look all like unto
common country folk that had never been in good company."

This is an atom: 
Though Clare might be a common country girl, yet she was shocked by
Gertrude's rudeness.  She had been brought up by Rachel to believe that
the quality of her dress was of less consequence than that of her
manners.  Clare thought that if Gertrude were a fair sample of "good
company," she did not wish to mix in it.

This is an atom: 
"I have been alway bred up in the Court," Gertrude went on, removing her
hood.  "I never was away thence afore.  Of course I do conceive that I
am descended to a lower point than heretofore--you have no coach, I dare
wager? yet I looked not to find my new kin donned in sorry camlet and
mean dowlas.  Have you any waiting-maid?--or is that piece of civility
[civilisation] not yet crept up into this far corner of the world?"

This is an atom: 
Clare summoned Jennet, and took her own seat in the further window.  The
vulgar, purse-proud tone of Gertrude's remarks disgusted her
exceedingly.  She did not enter into all of them.  Simple Clare could
not see what keeping a carriage had to do with gentlemanliness.

This is an atom: 
Jennet came in, and dropped a "lout" to the bride, whom she was disposed
to regard with great reverence as a real lady.  At that time, "lady" was
restricted to women of title, the general designation being
"gentlewoman."

This is an atom: 
"Here, woman!" was Gertrude's peremptory order.  "Untwist my hair, and
dress it o'er again."

This is an atom: 
Jennet quickly untwisted the hair, which was elaborately curled and
frizzed; and when it was reduced to smoothness, asked,--"What mun [must]
I do wi' 't?"

This is an atom: 
"Eh?" said Gertrude.

This is an atom: 
"I'm ill set [I find it difficult] to make thore twirls and twists,"
explained Jennet.  "Mun I curl 't, or ye'll ha' 't bred?"  [Braided,
plaited.]

This is an atom: 
"What means the jade?" demanded Gertrude with an oath.

This is an atom: 
Clare was horrified.  She had heard men swear when they were in a
passion, and one or two when they were not; but that a woman should
deliberately preface her words with oaths was something new and shocking
to her.  Lady Enville's strongest adjurations were mild little
asseverations "by this fair daylight," or words no nearer profanity.
However, startled as she was, Clare came out of her corner to mediate.

This is an atom: 
"How should it like you dressed?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh! with the crisping-pins.  'Twill take as short time as any way."

This is an atom: 
"Wi' whatten a thingcum?"  [with what sort of a thing] stared Jennet.

This is an atom: 
"I am afeared, Sister, we have no crisping-pins," said Clare.

This is an atom: 
"No crisping-pins!" cried Gertrude, with another oath.  "Verily, I might
have come to Barbary!  Are you well assured?"

This is an atom: 
"Be there any manner of irons, Jennet, for crisping or curling the
hair?"

This is an atom: 
"Nay, Mistress Clare, we're Christians here," said Jennet in her coolest
manner, which was very cool indeed.  "We known nought about French ways,
nor foreigners nother.  [In Lancashire, strangers to the locality, if
only from the next county, are termed foreigners.] There's been no such
gear i' this house sin' I come--and that's eighteen year come Lady Day."

This is an atom: 
"Good sonties!  [Little saints!] do't as thou wilt," sneered Gertrude.
"I would I had brought all my gear withal.  Whate'er possessed yon jade
Audrey to fall sick, that I was like to leave her behind at Chester!--
Truly, I knew not what idiots I was coming amongst--very savages, that
wist not the usages of decent folk!"

This is an atom: 
"Bi' th' mass!"  [not yet obsolete] cried Jennet in burning wrath,
resorting to her strongest language, "but I'm no more an idiot nor thee,
my well-spoken dame,--nay, nor a savage nother.  And afore I set up to
dress thy hure again, thou may ask me o' thy bended knees--nor I'll none
do't then, I warrant thee!"

This is an atom: 
And setting down the brush with no light hand, away stalked Miss Jennet,
bristling with indignation.  Gertrude called her back angrily in vain,
looked after her for a moment with parted lips, and then broke forth
into a torrent of mingled wrath and profanity.  She averred that if one
of her fathers servants had thus spoken, she would have had her
horsewhipped within an inch of her life.  Clare let her run on until she
cooled down a little, and then quietly answered that in that part of the
world the people were very independent; but if Gertrude would allow her,
she would try to dress her hair as well as she could.  That it would be
of no use to ask Jennet again, Clare well knew; and she shrank from
exposing her dear old Barbara to the insolent vulgarity of Gertrude.

This is an atom: 
"You may as well," said Gertrude coolly, and without a word of thanks.
"You be meet for little else, I dare say."

This is an atom: 
And reseating herself before the mirror, she submitted her hair to
Clare's inexperienced handling.  For a first attempt, however, the
result was tolerably satisfactory, though Clare had never before dressed
any hair but her own; and Gertrude showed her gratitude by merely
asserting, without anger or swearing, that she was right thankful no
ladies nor gentlemen should behold her thus disfigured, as she would not
for all the treasures of the Indies that they should.  With this
delicate compliment to her new relatives, she rustled down into the
hall, Clare following meekly.  Gertrude had not changed her dress;
perhaps she did not think it worth while to honour people who dressed in
say and camlet.  Sir Thomas received her with scrupulous deference, set
her on his right hand, and paid all kindly attention to her comfort.
For some time, however, it appeared doubtful whether anything on the
supper-table was good enough for the exacting young lady.  Those around
her came at last to the conclusion that Gertrude's protestations
required considerable discount; since, after declaring that she "had no
stomach," and "could not pick a lark's bones," she finished by eating
more than Clare and Blanche put together.  Jack, meanwhile, was
attending to his own personal wants, and took no notice of his bride,
beyond a cynical remark now and then, to which Gertrude returned a sharp
answer.  It was evident that no love was lost between them.

This is an atom: 
As soon as supper was over, the bride went up to her own room, declaring
as she went that "if yon savage creature had the handling of her
gowns"--by which epithet Clare guessed that she meant Jennet--"there
would not be a rag left meet to put on"--and commanding, rather than
requesting, that Clare and Blanche would come and help her.  Sir Thomas
looked surprised.

This is an atom: 
"Be these the manners of the great?" said he, too low for Jack to hear.

This is an atom: 
"Oh ay!" responded his wife, who was prepared to fall down at the feet
of her daughter-in-law, because she was _Lady_ Gertrude.  "So commanding
is she!--as a very queen, I do protest.  She hath no doubt been used to
great store of serving-maidens."

This is an atom: 
Indeed his mind was so distracted respecting the youth, that he was
scarcely able to understand my exhortations.

This is an atom: 
He entreated me with agonizing energy to save his son from such a life
as he had led, and gave me the address of a woman in whose house he
lodged.

This is an atom: 
I was, however, unable to find the boy in spite of many earnest inquiries."

This is an atom: 
"Did you hear his name?" asked the wife.

This is an atom: 
"George West," was the reply.

This is an atom: 
At the mention of his name, the boy ceased to sob.

This is an atom: 
Breathlessly he heard the account of his father's last request, of
the benevolent clergyman's wish to fulfill it. He started up, ran toward
the door, and endeavored to open it; Mr. Leyton calmly restrained him.
"You must not escape," he said.

This is an atom: 
"I cannot stop here. I cannot bear to look at you. Let me go!" The
lad said this wildly, and shook himself away.

This is an atom: 
"Why, I intend you nothing but kindness."
A new flood of tears gushed forth; and George West said between his
sobs,
"Whilst you were searching for me to help me, I was trying to burn
you in your house.

This is an atom: 
I cannot bear it." He sunk on his knees, and covered his face with
both hands.

This is an atom: 
There was a long silence, for Mr. and Mrs. Leyton were as much moved
as the boy, who was bowed down with shame and penitence, to which
hitherto he had been a stranger.

This is an atom: 
At last the clergyman asked, "What could have induced you to commit such
a crime?"
Rising suddenly in the excitement of remorse, gratitude, and many
feelings new to him, he hesitated for a moment, and then told his story;
he related his trials, his sins, his sorrows, his supposed wrongs,
his burning anger at the terrible fate of his only parent, and his
rage at the exultation of the crowd: his desolation on recovering
from his swoon, his thirst for vengeance, the attempt to satisfy it.

This is an atom: 
He spoke with untaught, child-like simplicity, without attempting to
suppress the emotions which successively overcame him.

This is an atom: 
When he ceased, the lady hastened to the crouching boy, and soothed
him with gentle words.

This is an atom: 
The very tones of her voice were new to him. They pierced his heart
more acutely than the fiercest of the upbraidings and denunciations
of his old companions.

This is an atom: 
He looked on his merciful benefactors with bewildered tenderness. He
kissed Mrs.
Leyton's hand then gently laid on his shoulder. He gazed about like one
in a dream who dreaded to wake.

This is an atom: 
He became faint and staggered. He was laid gently on a sofa, and Mr. and
Mrs.

This is an atom: 
Leyton left him.

This is an atom: 
Food was shortly administered to him, and after a time, when his senses
had become sufficiently collected, Mr. Leyton returned to the study,
and explained holy and beautiful things, which were new to the neglected
boy: of the great yet loving Father; of Him who loved the poor, forlorn
wretch, equally with the richest, and noblest, and happiest; of the force
and efficacy of the sweet beatitude, "Blessed are the Merciful,
for they shall obtain Mercy."

This is an atom: 
I heard this story from Mr. Leyton, during a visit to him in May.
George West was then head-plowman to a neighboring farmer, one of the
cleanest, best behaved, and moat respected laborers in the parish.

This is an atom: 
* * * * *
FROM FRASER'S MAGAZINE.

This is an atom: 
THE GREAT MARSHAL SUWARROW.

This is an atom: 
The Russian is eminently fitted for a soldier's life; his education is
almost as martial as if he had been brought up in a camp; for his
relatives and neighbors hold their lands by military tenure, and
love to talk together of the days when they served in the wars.

This is an atom: 
All, from the highest order to the lowest, look to the fulfillment
of their ancient prophecy, that "_All the world is to be conquered
by the arms of Russia_."

This is an atom: 
Should some man of resplendent genius, like Suwarrow, chance to
command, there is no calculating on the position to which the Russian
army might attain.

This is an atom: 
Suwarrow was not alone fitted to lead an army, but was exactly the
general to form one: his frankness and generosity, and the manner
in which his habits identified him with his soldiers, endeared him
to the army; while his religious feelings and exercises, and the
habit of participating in some of their superstitions, sanctified
him in the eyes of the men, and gave him unbounded influence.

This is an atom: 
Some of the anecdotes with which we have met exhibit feelings for which
we were but little inclined to give the devoted warrior credit,
for most certainly we should never have sought in rude camps, and
among wild Cossacks, for gentle affections and tender emotions; and
yet even there they may be found; and we see that he whose whole
existence was nearly an uninterrupted series of military exploits,
was by no means devoid of those congenial sympathies which make up
the charm of domestic life....

This is an atom: 
"Go to--seventeen!" echoed Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"Well-a-day!  What can the lass do with them all?" wondered Sir Thomas.

This is an atom: 
"Dear hearts!  Ye would not see an earl's daughter low and mean?"
interposed Lady Enville.

This is an atom: 
"If this Gertrude be not so, Orige,--at the least in her heart,--then is
Jennet a false speaker, and mine ears have bewrayed me, belike.
Methinks a woman of good breeding might leave swearing and foul talk to
the men, and be none the worse for the same: nor see I good cause
wherefore she should order her sisters like so many Barbary slaves."

This is an atom: 
"Ay so!--that marketh her high degree," said Lady Enville.

This is an atom: 
"I wis not, Orige, how Gertrude gat her degree, nor her father afore
her," answered Rachel: "but this I will tell thee--that if one of the
`beggarly craftsmen' that Jack loveth to snort at, should allow him,
before me, in such talk as I have heard of her, I would call on Sim to
put him forth with no more ado.  Take my word for it, she cometh of no
old nor honourable stock, but is of low degree in very truth, if the
truth were known."

This is an atom: 
Rachel's instinct was right.  Lady Gertrude's father was a _parvenu_, of
very mean extraction.  Her great-uncle had made the family fortune,
partly in trade, but mostly by petty peculations; and her father, who
had attracted the Queen's eye when a young lawyer, had been rapidly
promoted through the minor grades of nobility, until he had reached his
present standing.  Gertrude was not noble in respect of anything but her
title.

This is an atom: 
Lady Enville, with a smile which was half amusement and half contempt,
rose and retired to her boudoir.  Sir Thomas and Rachel sat still by the
hall fire, both deeply meditating: the former with his head thrown back,
gazing--without seeing them--at the shields painted on the ceiling;
while the latter leaned forward towards the fire, resting her chin on
both hands.

This is an atom: 
"What saidst, Tom?" asked Rachel in a dreamy voice.

This is an atom: 
"I spake not to know it, good Sister: but have what I said, an' thou so
wilt.  I was thinking on that word of Paul--`Not many noble are called.'
I thought, Rachel, how far it were better to be amongst the called of
God, than to be of the noble."

This is an atom: 
"'Tis not the first, time that I have thanked the Lord I am not noble,"
said Rachel without changing her attitude.  "'Tis some comfort to know
me not so high up that any shall be like to take thought to cut my head
off.  And if Gertrude be noble--not to say"--Rachel's voice died away.
"Tom," she said in a moment later, "we have made some blunders in our
lives, thou and I."

This is an atom: 
"I have, dear Rachel," said Sir Thomas sighing: "what thine may be I wis
not."

This is an atom: 
"God knoweth!" she replied in a low voice.  "And I know of one--the
grandest of all blunders.  Thou settedst out for Heaven these few months
gone, Tom.  May be thou shalt find more company on the road than thou
wert looking for."

This is an atom: 
"Dear Rachel!"

This is an atom: 
"Clare must be metely well on by this time," she continued in the dry
tone with which she often veiled her deepest feelings, "and Blanche is
tripping in at the gate, or I mistake.  I would not by my goodwill have
thee lonely in the road, Tom: and I suppose--there shall be room for
more than two a-breast, no' will?"  [Will there not?]

This is an atom: 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an atom: 
During all this time, the once close intercourse between the Court and
the parsonage had been somewhat broken off.  Arthur had never been in
the Squire's house since the day when Lucrece jilted him; and Clare was
shy of showing herself in his vicinity.  Blanche visited Mrs Tremayne
occasionally, and sometimes Lysken paid a return visit; but very much
less was seen of all than in old times.  When, therefore, it became
known at Enville Court that Arthur had received holy orders at the
Bishop's last ordination, the whole family as it were woke with a start
to the recollection that Arthur had almost passed out of their sphere.
He was to be his father's curate for the present--the future was
doubtful; but in an age when there were more livings than clergy to fill
them, no difficulty need be expected in the way of obtaining promotion.

This is an atom: 
Just after Jack and Gertrude had returned to London (to the great relief
of every one, themselves not excepted), in his usual unannounced style,
Mr John Feversham made his appearance at Enville Court.  Blanche
greeted him with a deep blush, for she felt ashamed of her former
unworthy estimate of his character.  John brought one interesting piece
of news--that his uncle and aunt were well, and Lucrece was now the
mother of a little boy.

This is an atom: 
Lady Enville looked up quickly.  Then John was no longer the heir of
Feversham Hall.  It might therefore be necessary--if he yet had any
foolish hopes--to put an extinguisher upon him.  She rapidly decided
that she must issue private instructions to Sir Thomas.  That gentleman,
she said to herself, really was so foolish--particularly of late, since
he had fallen into the pit of Puritanism--that if she did not look
sharply after him, he might actually dream of resigning his last and
fairest daughter to a penniless and prospectless suitor.  If any such
idea existed in the mind of Sir Thomas, of John Feversham, or of
Blanche,--and since John had saved Blanche's life, it was not at all
unlikely,--it must be nipped in the bud.

This is an atom: 
Accordingly, on the first opportunity, Lady Enville began.

This is an atom: 
"Of course you see now, Sir Thomas, how ill a match Master John
Feversham should have been for Blanche."

This is an atom: 
"Wherefore?" was the short answer.

This is an atom: 
"Sith he is no longer the heir."  [Sith and since are both contractions
of sithence.]

This is an atom: 
"Oh!--ah!" said Sir Thomas, as unpromisingly as before.

This is an atom: 
"Why, surely you would ne'er dream of so monstrous a thing?"

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas, who had been looking out of the window, came across to the
fire, and took up the master's position before it--standing just in the
middle of the hearth with his back to the fire.

This is an atom: 
"Better wait, Orige, and see whereof John and Blanche be dreaming," said
he calmly.

This is an atom: 
"What reckoneth he to do now, meet for livelihood?"

This is an atom: 
It would be difficult to estimate the number of degrees by which poor
John had fallen in her Ladyship's thermometer, since he had ceased to be
the expected heir of Feversham Hall.

This is an atom: 
"He looketh," said Sir Thomas absently, as if he were thinking of
something else, "to receive--if God's good pleasure be--holy orders."

This is an atom: 
"A parson!" shrieked Lady Enville, in her languid style.

This is an atom: 
"A parson, Orige.  Hast aught against the same?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh no!--so he come not anear Blanche."

This is an atom: 
"Wilt hold him off with the fire-fork?"

This is an atom: 
"Sir Thomas, I do beseech you, consider this matter in sober sadness.
Only think, if Blanche were to take in hand any fantasy for him, after
his saving of her!"

This is an atom: 
"Well, Orige--what if so?"

This is an atom: 
"I cannot bring you to a right mind, Sir Thomas!" said his wife
pettishly.  "Blanche,--our fairest bud and last!--to be cast away on a
poor parson--she who might wed with a prince, and do him no disgrace!
It were horrible!"

This is an atom: 
"Were it?" was the dry response.

This is an atom: 
"I tell you," said Lady Enville, sitting up in her chair--always with
her a mark of agitation--"I would as soon see the child in her coffin!"

This is an atom: 
"Hush, Orige, hush thee!" replied her husband, very seriously now.

This is an atom: 
"It were as little grief, Sir Thomas!  I would not for the world--nay,
not for the whole world--that Blanche should be thus lost.  Why, she
might as well wed a fisherman at once!"

This is an atom: 
"Well, the first Christian parsons were fishermen; and I dare be bound
they made not ill husbands.  Yet methinks, Orige, if thou keptest thy
grief until the matter came to pass, it were less waste of power than
so."

This is an atom: 
"`Forewarned is forearmed,' Sir Thomas.  And I am marvellous afeared
lest you should be a fool."

This is an atom: 
"Marry guep!"  [probably a corruption of _go up_] ejaculated Rachel,
coming in.  "`Satan rebuketh sin,' I have heard say, but I ne'er listed
him do it afore."

This is an atom: 
After all, Lady Enville proved a true prophet.  Mr John Feversham was
so obtuse, so unreasonable, so unpardonably preposterous, as to imagine
it possible that Blanche Enville might yet marry him, though he had the
prospect of a curacy, and had not the prospect of Feversham Hall.

This is an atom: 
"I told you, Sir Thomas!" said the prophetess, in the tone with which
she might have greeted an earthquake.  "Oh that you had listed me, and
gat him away hence ere more mischief were done!"

This is an atom: 
"I see no mischief done, Orige," replied her husband quietly.  "We will
call the child, and see what she saith."

This is an atom: 
"I do beseech you, Sir Thomas, commit not this folly!  Give your own
answer, and let it be, Nay.  Why, Blanche may be no wiser than to say
him ay."

This is an atom: 
"She no may," [she may not] said Sir Thomas dryly.

This is an atom: 
But he was determined to tell her, despite the earnest protestations of
his wife, who dimly suspected that Blanche's opinion of John was not
what it had been, and was afraid that she would be so wanting in worldly
wisdom as to accept his offer.  Lady Enville took her usual resource--an
injured tone and a handkerchief--while Sir Thomas sent for Blanche.

This is an atom: 
Blanche, put on her trial, faltered--coloured--and, to her mother's deep
disgust, pleaded guilty of loving John Feversham at last.  Lady Enville
shed some real tears over the demoralisation of her daughter's taste.

This is an atom: 
"There is no manner of likeness, Blanche, betwixt this creature and Don
John," she urged.

This is an atom: 
"Ay, mother, there is _no_ likeness," said Blanche calmly.

This is an atom: 
"I thank Heaven for that mercy!" muttered Rachel.

This is an atom: 
"Likeness!" repeated Sir Thomas.  "Jack Feversham is worth fifty Don
Johns."

This is an atom: 
"Dear heart! how is the child changed for the worser!" sobbed her
disappointed mother, who saw the coronet and fortune, on which she had
long set her heart for Blanche, fading away like a dissolving view.

This is an atom: 
"Orige, be not a fool!" growled Rachel suddenly.  "But, dear heart!  I
am a fool to ask thee."

This is an atom: 
There was a family tempest.  But at last the minority succumbed; and
Blanche became the betrothed of John Feversham.

This is an atom: 
From the day of Jack's departure from Enville Court with Gertrude, Sir
Thomas never heard another word of his debts.  Whether Jack paid them,
or compounded for them, or let them alone, or how the matter was
settled, remained unknown at Enville Court.  They only heard the most
flourishing accounts of everything connected with Jack and Gertrude.
They were always well; Jack was always prospering, and on the point of
promotion to a higher step of the social ladder.  Sir Thomas declared
drily, that his only wonder was that Jack was not a duke by this time,
considering how many steps he must have advanced.  But Lady Gertrude
never paid another visit to Enville Court; and nobody regretted it
except Jack's step-mother.  Jack's own visits were few, and made at long
intervals.  His language was always magniloquent and sanguine: but he
grew more and more reserved about his private affairs, he aged fast, and
his hair was grey at a time of life when his father's had been without a
silver thread.  Sir Thomas was by no means satisfied with his son's
career: but Jack suavely evaded all inquiries, and he came to the
sorrowful conclusion that nothing could be done except to pray for him.

This is an atom: 
It was late in the autumn, and the evening of Blanche's departure from
home after her marriage.  John Feversham's clerical labours were to lie
in the north of Cheshire, so Blanche would not be far away, and might be
expected to visit at the Court more frequently than Lucrece or Jack.  By
the bride's especial request, the whole family from the parsonage were
present at the ceremony, and Lysken was one of the bridesmaids.

This is an atom: 
The guests had been dancing in the hall; they were now resting, standing
or sitting in small groups, and conversing,--when Clare stole out of the
garden-door, and made her way to the arbour.

This is an atom: 
She could not exactly tell why she felt so sad.  Of course, she was
sorry to lose Blanche.  Such an occasion did not seem to Clare at all
proper for mirth and feasting: on the contrary, it felt the thing next
saddest to a funeral.  They would see Blanche now and then, no doubt;
but she was lost to them on the whole: she would never again be, what
she had always been till now, one of themselves, an integral part of the
home.  And they were growing fewer; only four left now, where there had
once been a household of eight.  And Clare felt a little of the
sadness--felt much more deeply by some than others--of being, though
loved by several, yet first with none.  Well, God had fixed her lot: and
it was a good one, she whispered to herself, as if to repel the sadness
gathering at her heart--it was a good one.  She would always live at
home; she would grow old, ministering to father and mother and aunt--
wanted and looked for by all three; not useless--far from it.  And that
was a great deal.  What if the Lord had not thought her meet for work in
His outer vineyard?--was not this little home-corner in His vineyard
still?--She was not a foundation-stone, not a cornice, not a pillar, in
the Church of God.  Nay, she thought herself not even one of the stones
in the wall: only a bit of mortar, filling up a crevice.  But the bit of
mortar was wanted, and was in its right place, because the Builder had
put it there.  That was a great deal--oh yes, it was everything.

This is an atom: 
"And yet," said Clare's heart,--"and yet!--"

This is an atom: 
For this was not an unlabelled sorrow.  Arthur Tremayne's name was
written all over it.  And Clare had to keep her heart stayed on two
passages of Scripture, which she took as specially for her and those in
her position.  It is true, they were written of men: but did not the
grammar say that the masculine included the feminine?  If so, what right
had any one to suppose (as Lady Enville had once said flippantly) that
"there were no promises in the Bible to old maids?"

This is an atom: 
Were there not these glorious two?--the one promise of the Old Covenant,
the one promise of the New.

This is an atom: 
"Even unto them will I give in Mine house and within My walls a place
and a name better than of sons and of daughters; I will give them an
everlasting name, that shall not be cut off."  [Isaiah sixteen verse 5.]

This is an atom: 
"These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth.  These
were redeemed from among men, being the first-fruits unto God and to the
Lamb.  And in their mouth was found no guile; for they are without fault
before the throne of God."  [Revelations fourteen verses 4, 5.]

This is an atom: 
So Clare was content.  Yet it was a sorrowful sort of content, after
all--for Clare was human, too.

This is an atom: 
She was absently pulling off some dead leaves from the arbour, and the
sudden jump which she gave showed how much she was startled.

This is an atom: 
"May I come in, Clare?" asked a voice at the entrance.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, ay--come in," said Clare, in a flutter, and trembling all over.

This is an atom: 
"I did not mean to fright you," said Arthur, with a smile, as he came
inside and sat down.  "I desired speech of you, on a matter whereof I
could not well touch save in private.  Clare,--may I speak,--dear
Clare?"

This is an atom: 
But of course, dear reader, you know all about it.

This is an atom: 
So Clare was first with somebody, after all.

This is an atom: 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an atom: 
Note 1.  A price which, about sixty years before, a vice-queen had
thought sufficient in presenting a new year's gift to Queen Anne Boleyn.
John Husee writes to his mistress, Honour Viscountess Lisle, in 1534,
that he has obtained the kersey for her gift to the Queen, eleven and a
quarter yards at 5 shillings the yard, "very fine and very white."
(Lisle Papers, twelve 90.)  A few weeks later he writes, "The Queen's
grace liketh your kersey specially well."  (Lisle Papers, eleven 112.)

This is an atom: 
Note 2.  The disuse of this custom in England really dates from a rather
later period.  `Sister' has somewhat resumed its position, but
`Daughter' and `Niece,' in the vocative, are never heard amongst us now.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

This is an atom: 
"DIEU LA VOULU."

This is an atom: 
"Over himself and his own heart's complaining
  Victorious still."

This is an atom: 
The bells were pealing merrily for the marriage of Clare Avery--I beg
her pardon--of Clare Tremayne; and the wedding party were seated at
breakfast in the great hall at Enville Court.

This is an atom: 
"The bridesmaids be well-looking," said Lady Enville, behind her fan, to
Sir Piers Feversham, who was her next neighbour,--for Sir Piers and
Lucrece had come to the wedding--"and I do hear Mistress Penelope
Travis--she of them that is nearest--is like to be the next bride of our
vicinage."

This is an atom: 
"Say you so?" responded Sir Piers.  "I do desire all happiness be with
her.  But there is one of yonder maids for whom in very deed I feel
compassion, and it is Mistress Lysken Barnevelt.  Her May is well-nigh
over, and no bells be ringing for her.  Poor maiden!"

This is an atom: 
"Go to, now, what dolts be men!" quoth Mistress Rachel Enville,
addressing herself, to all appearance, to the dish of flummery which
stood before her.  "They think, poor misconceiving companions! that we
be all a-dying for them.  That's a man's notion.  Moreover, they take it
that 'tis the one end and aim of every woman in the world to be wed.
That's a man's notion, again.  And belike they fancy, poor patches! that
when she striketh thirty years on the bell, any woman will wed any man
that will but take compassion to ask her.  That caps all their notions.
(Thou shalt right seldom hear a woman to make no such a blunder.  They
know better.)  Poor blockheads!--as if we could not be useful nor happy
without _them_!  Lysken Barnevelt and Rachel Enville, at the least, be
not fools enough to think it."

This is an atom: 
"Neither is the Queen's Majesty, my mistress," observed Sir Piers,
greatly amused.

This is an atom: 
"Who e'er said the Queen's Majesty were a fool?" demanded Rachel
bluntly.  "She is a woman, and no man--Heaven be praised for all His
mercies!"

This is an atom: 
"Yet if no man were," pursued Sir Piers, "methinks you gentlewomen
should be but ill bestead."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, should we so?" retorted Rachel.  "Look you, women make no wars, nor
serve therein: nor women be no lawyers, to set folk by the ears: nor
women write not great tomes of controversy, wherein they curse the one
the other because Nell loveth a white gown, and Bess would have a black.
Is the Devil a woman?  Answer me that, I pray you."

This is an atom: 
"Do women make no wars?" laughed Sir Piers.  "What! with Helen of Troy,
and--"

This is an atom: 
"Good lack, my master!--and what ill had Helen's fair face wrought in
all this world, had there been no dolts of men to be beguilen thereby?"
was Rachel's instant response.

This is an atom: 
Sir Piers made a hasty retreat from that part of the field.

This is an atom: 
"But, my mistress, though the Devil be no woman, yet was the woman the
first to be deceived by him."

This is an atom: 
"Like enough!" snapped Rachel.  "She sinned not open-eyed, as did Adam.
She trusted a man-devil, like too many of her daughters sithence, and
she and they alike have found bitter cause to rue the day they did it."

This is an atom: 
Sir Piers prudently discovered that Lady Enville was asking him a
question, and let Rachel alone thereafter.

This is an atom: 
Ay, Lysken Barnevelt adopted from choice the life to which Clare had
been only willing to resign herself because she thought it was the
Father's will.  It amused Lysken to hear people pity her as one who had
failed to win the woman's aim in life.  To have failed to obtain what
she had never sought, and did not want, was in Lysken's eyes an easily
endurable affliction.  The world was her home, while she passed through
it on her journey to the better Home: and all God's family were her
brethren or her children.  The two sisters from Enville Court were both
happy and useful in their corners of the great harvest-field; but she
was the happiest, and the best loved, and when God called her the most
missed of all--this solitary Lysken.  Distinguished by no unusual habit,
fettered by no unnatural vow, she went her quiet, peaceful, blessed
way--a nun of the Order of Providence, for ever.

This is an atom: 
And what was the fate of Lady Enville?

This is an atom: 
Just what is generally the fate of women of her type.  They pass through
life making themselves vastly comfortable, and those around them vastly
uncomfortable, and then "depart without being desired."  They are never
missed--otherwise than as a piece of furniture might be missed.  To such
women the whole world is but a platform for the exhibition and
glorification of the Great Me: and the persons in it are units with whom
the Great Me deigns--or does not deign--to associate.  Happy are those
few of them who awake, on this side of the dread tribunal, to the
knowledge that in reality this Great Me is a very little me indeed, yet
a soul that can be saved, and that may be lost.

This is an atom: 
And Rachel?--Ah, Rachel was missed when she went on the inevitable
journey.  The house was not the same without her.  She had been like a
fresh breeze blowing through it,--perhaps a little sharp at times, but
always wholesome.  Those among whom she had dwelt never realised all she
had been to them, nor all the love they had borne to her, until they
could tell her of it no more.

This is an atom: 
The winter of 1602 had come, and on the ground in Devonshire the snow
lay deep.  The trees, thickly planted all round Umberleigh, drooped with
the white weight; and a keen North wind groaned among the branches.  All
was gloomy and chill outside.

This is an atom: 
And inside, all was gloomy and mournful too, for a soul was in
departing.  The ripe fruit that had tarried so late on the old tree, was
shaken down at last.  Softly and tenderly, the Lady Elizabeth, the young
wife of Sir Robert Basset, was ministering to the last earthly needs of
Philippa the aged, the sister of her husband's grandfather.  [Note 1.]

This is an atom: 
"'Tis high time, Bess, child!" whispered the dying woman, true to her
character to the last.  "I must have been due on the roll of Death these
thirty years.  I began to marvel if he had forgot me.  And I am going
Home, child.  Thank God, I am going Home!

This is an atom: 
"They are are all safe yonder, Bess--Arthur, and Nell [Wife of Sir
Arthur Basset], and little Honor, and thy little lad [Arthur, who died
in infancy], and Jack, and Frances--my darling sister!--and George, and
Kate, and Nan.  I am assured of them, all.  There be James and Mall,--
well, I am not so sure of them.  Would God I were!  He knoweth.

This is an atom: 
"But I do hope I shall see my mother.  And, O Bess!  I shall see him--my
blessed, beloved father--I _shall_ see him!

This is an atom: 
"And they'll be glad, child.  They'll all be glad when they see poor
blundering old Philippa come stumbling in at the gate.  I misdoubt if
they look for it.  They'll be glad!

This is an atom: 
"Bess, I do hope thou wilt ne'er turn thy back upon God so many years as
I have done.  And I had never turned to Him at last, if He had not
stooped and turned me.

This is an atom: 
"Tell Robin, with my blessing, to be a whole man for God.  A whole man
and a true!  He is too rash--and yet not bold [true] enough.  He cares
too much what other folk think.  (Thank God, I ne'er fell in that trap!
'Tis an ill one to find the way out.)  Do thou keep him steadfast, Bess.
He'll ask some keeping.  There's work afore thee yet, child; 'tis work
worthy an angel--to keep one man steadfast for God.  Thou must walk
close to God thyself to do it.  And after all, 'twill be none of thy
doing, but of His that wrought by thee.--

This is an atom: 
"And God bless the childre!  I count there's the making of a true man in
little Arthur.  Thou mayest oft-times tell what a child is like to be
when he is but four years old.  God bless him, and make him another
Arthur!  (Nay, I stay me not at Robin's father, as thou dost.  Another
Arthur,--like that dear father of ours, whom we so loved!  He is _the_
Arthur for me.)  I can give the lad no better blessing.

This is an atom: 
"Wilt draw the curtain, Bess?  I feel as though I might sleep.  Bless
thee, dear heart, for all thy tender ministering.  And if I wake not
again, but go to God in sleep,--farewell, and Christ be with thee!"

This is an atom: 
So she slept--and woke not again.

This is an atom: 
Three months after the death of Philippa Basset, came another death--
like hers, of an old woman full of years.  The last of the Tudors passed
away from earth.  Sir Robert Basset was free.  To Stuart, or Seymour, or
Clifford, he "owed no subscription."  King of England he would be _de
facto_, as _de jure_ he believed himself in his heart.

This is an atom: 
.

This is an atom: 
* * * * *

This is an atom: 
SKILFUL ANATOMISTS.

This is an atom: 
(_For the Mirror_.)
It may not be generally known that the tadpole acts the same part
with fish that ants do with birds; and that through the agency of
this little reptile, perfect skeletons, even of the smallest fishes
may be obtained.
To produce this, it is but necessary to suspend the fish by threads
attached to the head and tail in an horizontal position, in a jar of
water, such as is found in a pond, and change it often, till the tadpoles
have finished their work. Two or three tadpoles will perfectly dissect
a fish in twenty-four hours.

This is an atom: 
H.S.S.

This is an atom: 
* * * * *

This is an atom: 
THREE ENTHUSIASTIC NATURALISTS.

This is an atom: 
The first is a learned entomologist, who, hearing one evening at
the Linnean Society that a yellow Scarabaeus, otherwise beetle,
of a very rare kind was to be captured on the sands at Swansea,
immediately took his seat in the mail for that place, and brought
back in triumph the object of his desire.

This is an atom: 
The second is Mr. David Douglas, who spent two years among the wild
Indians of the Rocky Mountains, was reduced to such extremities as
occasionally to sup upon the flaps of his saddle; and once, not having
this resource, was obliged to eat up all the seeds he had collected the
previous forty days in order to appease the cravings of nature. Not
appalled by these sufferings, he has returned again to endure similar
hardships, and all for a few simples. The third example is Mr.
Drummond, the assistant botanist to Franklin in his last hyperborean
journey.

This is an atom: 
In the midst of snow, with the thermometer 15Â° below zero, without a
tent, sheltered from the inclemency of the weather only by a hut
built of the branches of trees, and depending for subsistence from
day to day on a solitary Indian hunter, "I obtained," says this
amiable and enthusiastic botanist, "a few mosses; and, on Christmas
day,"--mark, gentle reader, the day, of all others, as if it were
a reward for his devotion,--"I had the pleasure of finding a very
minute GymnÃ³stomum, hitherto undescribed.

This is an atom: 
I remained alone for the rest of the winter, except when my man
occasionally visited me with meat; and I found the time hang
very heavy, as I had no books, and nothing could be done in the way of
collecting specimens of natural history."
_Magazine of Natural History_

This is an atom: 
* * * * *

This is an atom: 
[Illustration: BURIAL PLACE IN TONGATABU.]
This is another of Mr. Bennett's sketches made during his recent visit
to several of the Polynesian Islands. It represents the burial-place of
the Chiefs of Tongatabu: over this "earthly prison of their bones," we
may say with Titus Andronicus:

This is an atom: 
In pence and honour rest you here my sons:
(The) readiest champions, repose you here, Secure from worldly
chances and mishaps:
Here lurks no treason, here no envy swells, Here grow no damned
grudges: here are no storms, No noise, but silence and eternal
sleep.

This is an atom: 
Mr. Bennett thus describes the spot, with some interesting circumstances:

This is an atom: 
"July 29th. I visited this morning a beautiful spot named Maofanga, at
a short distance from our anchorage; here was the burial-place of
the chiefs.
The tranquillity of this secluded spot, and the drooping trees of
the casuarina equisetifolia, added to the mournful solemnity of
the place.

This is an atom: 
Off this place, the Astrolabe French discovery ship lay when, some
time before, she fired on the natives. The circumstances respecting
this affair, as communicated to me, if correct, do not reflect much
credit on the commander of the vessel. They are as follow: During a gale
the Astrolabe drove on the reef, but was afterwards got off by the
exertion of the natives; some of the men deserting from the ship,
the chiefs were accused of enticing them away, and on the men not
being given up the ship fired on the village; the natives barricaded
themselves on the beach by throwing up sand heaps, and afterwards
retired into the woods.

This is an atom: 
The natives pointed out the effects of the shot; on the trees, a large
branch of a casuarina tree in the sacred enclosure was shot off, several
coco-nut trees were cut in two, and the marks of several spent
shots still remain on the trees: three natives were killed in this
attack.The little knot of persons who
wished to secure the King of Scots' accession, therefore, were intensely
anxious to obtain her assent to their project.

This is an atom: 
The Delphic oracle remained obstinately silent.  Neither grave
representations of necessity, nor coaxing, could induce her to open her
lips upon the subject; and as no living creature had ever taken
Elizabeth off her guard, there was no hope in that direction.  The old
woman remembered too well the winter day, forty-five years before, when
the time-serving courtiers left the dying sister at Westminster, to pay
court to the living sister at Hatfield; and with the mixture of weakness
and shrewdness which characterised her, she refused to run the risk of
its repetition by any choice of a successor from the candidates for the
throne.

This is an atom: 
There were five living persons who could set up a reasonable claim, of
whom four were descendants of Henry the Seventh.  They were all a long
way from the starting-point.

This is an atom: 
The first was the King of Scotland, son of Mary Queen of Scots, daughter
of James the Fifth, son of Princess Margaret of England, eldest daughter
of Henry the Seventh.

This is an atom: 
The second was the Lady Arbella Stuart, the only child of Lord Charles
Stuart, son of Lady Margaret Douglas, daughter of the same Princess
Margaret.

This is an atom: 
The third was Edward Seymour, son of Lady Katherine Grey, daughter of
Lady Frances Brandon, eldest daughter of Princess Mary, youngest
daughter of Henry the Seventh.

This is an atom: 
The fourth was Lady Anne Stanley, eldest daughter of Ferdinand Earl of
Derby, son of Lady Margaret Clifford, only daughter of Lady Eleanor
Brandon, second daughter of the same Princess Mary.

This is an atom: 
And the fifth was Sir Robert Basset of Umberleigh, son of Sir Arthur
Basset, son of Lady Frances Plantagenet, eldest daughter of Arthur Lord
Lisle, son of Edward the Fourth.

This is an atom: 
Of these five, the one who would have inherited the Crown, under the
will of Henry the Eighth, was unquestionably Edward Seymour; and, Mary
and Elizabeth being both now dead, the reversion fell to him also under
that of Edward the Sixth.  But, strange to say, he was not a formidable
opponent of James of Scotland.  Queen Elizabeth had been so deeply
offended with his mother (Lady Katherine Grey, sister of the beheaded
Lady Jane) for making a love-match without her royal licence, that she
had immured both bride and bridegroom in the Tower for years.  Perhaps
the prestige of Elizabeth's will remained potent, even after Elizabeth
was dead; perhaps Edward Seymour had no wish to occupy such a thorny
seat as the throne of England.  Neither he nor Lady Anne Stanley set up
the faintest claim to the succession; though Seymour, at least, might
have done so with a decided show of justice, as the law of succession
then stood.  By the two royal wills, King James of Scotland, and his
cousin, Lady Arbella Stuart, were entirely dispossessed; their claim had
to be made under the law as it had stood unaltered by the will of Henry
the Eighth.

This is an atom: 
But there was one prior question, which, had it been settled in the
affirmative, would have finally disposed of all these four claims at
once.  If the contract between Edward the Fourth and Elizabeth Lucy were
to be regarded as a legal marriage, then there could be no doubt who was
the true heir.  Better than any claim of Stuart or Tudor, of Seymour or
Stanley, was then that of the Devonshire knight, Sir Robert Basset.  For
fifteen hundred years, a contract had been held as legal marriage.  The
vast estates of the Plantagenets of Kent had passed to the Holands on
the validity of a contract no better, and perhaps worse, than that of
Elizabeth Lucy.  [Note 2.] Why was this contract to be set aside?

This is an atom: 
Had England at large been less apathetic, or had the little knot of
agitators been less politic, a civil war might have been reasonably
anticipated.  But the intriguers were determined that James of Scotland
should succeed; and James himself, aware of the flaw in his title, was
busily working with them to the same end.  Cecil, Lady Rich, Lady
Scrope, and Carey, were all pledged to let him know the exact moment of
the Queen's, decease, that he might set out for England at once.

This is an atom: 
All was gloom and suspense in the chamber of Richmond Palace, where the
great Queen of England lay dying.  Her ladies and courtiers urged her to
take more nourishment,--she refused.  They urged her to go to bed,--she
refused.  She would be a queen to her last breath.  No failure of bodily
strength could chill or tame the lion heart of Elizabeth.

This is an atom: 
At last, very delicately, Cecil attempted to sound the dying Queen on
that subject of the succession, always hitherto forbidden.  Her throat
was painful, and she spoke with difficulty: Cecil, as spokesman for her
Council, asked her to declare "whom she would have for King," offering
to name sundry persons, and requesting that.  Her Majesty would hold up
her finger when he came to the name which satisfied her.  To test the
vigour of her mind, he first named the King of France.

This is an atom: 
Elizabeth did not stir.

This is an atom: 
"The King's Majesty of Scotland?"

This is an atom: 
There was no sign still.

This is an atom: 
"My Lord Beauchamp?"--Edward Seymour, the heir according to the wills of
her father and brother.

This is an atom: 
Then the royal lioness was roused.

This is an atom: 
"I tell you," she said angrily, "I will have no rascal's son in my seat,
but a king's son."

This is an atom: 
There was no king's son among the candidates but one, and that was James
of Scotland.

This is an atom: 
Once more, when she was past speech, Elizabeth was asked if she wished
James to succeed her.  She indicated her pleasure in a manner which some
modern writers have questioned, but which was well understood in her own
day.  Lifting her clasped hands to her head, the dying Elizabeth made
them assume the form of a crown; and once more those around her knew
that she desired her successor to be a king.

This is an atom: 
Tradition says that as soon as Elizabeth was dead, Lady Scrope dropped a
sapphire ring from the window--a preconcerted signal--to her brother,
Robert Carey, who was waiting below.  Carey states that he was told in a
more matter-of-fact way--by a sentinel, whom he had previously requested
to bring him the news.

This is an atom: 
That hour Carey set out: and except for one night's rest at Carlisle, he
spurred night and day till he stood before King James.  There was a
sudden intimation--a hurried action taken--and the Stuarts were Kings of
England.

This is an atom: 
The claims of the Lady Arabella were disposed of by making her a
companion to the new Queen, until she had the presumption to marry, and,
of all people, to marry the heir under King Henry the Eighth's will.
This was too much.  She was imprisoned for life, and she died in her
prison, simply because she was her father's daughter and her husband's
wife.

This is an atom: 
The claims of Lord Beauchamp and Lady Anne Stanley needed no disposal,
since they had both remained perfectly quiescent, and had put forth no
claim.

This is an atom: 
But Robert Basset was not so easily managed.  James knew that he was
capable of making the throne a very uncomfortable seat.  And Basset,
with his usual rashness, had on the Queen's death dashed into the arena
and boldly asserted his right as the heir of Edward the Fourth.  The
only way to dispose of him was by making him realise that the crown was
beyond his grasp; and that if he persevered, he would find the scaffold
and the axe within it.  This was accordingly done so effectually that
weak, impulsive Basset quailed before the storm, and fled to France to
save his own life.  He survived the accession of James the First for
seventeen years at least [Note 3]; but no more was heard of his right to
the throne of England.

This is an atom: 
Forty years after the death of Elizabeth, the son of James of Scotland
was struggling for his crown, with half England against him.  Five years
later, there was a scaffold set up at Whitehall, and the blood royal was
poured out.  There were comparatively few who stood by King Charles to
the last.  But there was one--who had headed charges at Marston Moor
"for God, and King, and Country"--who had bled under his banner at
Edgehill--who lived to welcome back his most unworthy son and successor,
and to see the monarchy re-established in the Stuart line.  His name was
Arthur Basset.  [He died January 7, 1672.  See Prince's Worthies of
Devon.]

This is an atom: 
Ay, there had been "the making of a true man" in Colonel Arthur Basset.
The fit representative of that earlier Arthur, he had adopted in his
life the motto which, a hundred and fifty years before, the son of
Edward the Fourth had embroidered on his banner--"_Dieu l'a voulu_."

This is an atom: 
God had not written the name of Arthur Basset on the roll of the Kings
of England.  And Arthur Basset bowed his noble head to the decree, and
fell back to the ranks like a hero--no king, but a true man.

This is an atom: 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an atom: 
Note 1.  The date is fictitious.  The Atherington register has been
vainly searched for the burial of Philippa Basset, and the Heanton
register is marked in the return "illegible."

This is an atom: 
Note 2.  The evidence in the earlier case (of Joan Plantagenet) seems to
have rested entirely on the oaths of husband and wife; in the latter (of
Elizabeth Lucy) the contract was known to the entire family of the
bridegroom.

This is an atom: 
Note 3.  Prince states that "in consequence of his pretensions to the
Crown, and of his extravagance," Sir Robert was obliged to sell Heanton
and Whitechapel, which last was the old seat of his family.  If he did
sell Heanton, his son must have bought it back; for it was the family
residence in the year after Colonel Basset's death.  Umberleigh had been
deserted for Heanton on account of the low, damp situation of the
former, and the thick trees which crowded round the house.

This is an atom: 
Yet grief was not his pervading feeling, nor the shame, of being
known as the son of a transport.

This is an atom: 
It was revenge which burned within him.

This is an atom: 
He thought of the crowd which had come to feast upon his father's agony;
he longed to tear them to pieces, and he plucked savagely a handful of
the grass on which he leant. Oh, that he were a man! that he could
punish them all--all,--the spectators first the constables, the judge,
the jury, the witnesses,--one of them especially, a clergyman named
Leyton, who had given his evidence more positively, more clearly,
than all the others.

This is an atom: 
Oh, that he could do that man some injury,--but for him his father would
not have been identified and convicted.

This is an atom: 
Suddenly a thought occurred to him,--his eyes sparkled with fierce
delight.

This is an atom: 
"I know where he lives," he said to himself; "he has the farm and
parsonage of Millwood. I will go there at once,--it is almost dark
already. I will do as I have heard father say he once did to the Squire.
I will set his barns and his house on fire.

This is an atom: 
Yes, yes, he shall burn for it,--he shall get no more fathers transported."

This is an atom: 
To procure a box of matches was an easy task, and that was all the
preparation the boy made.

This is an atom: 
The autumn was far advanced. A cold wind was beginning to moan amongst
the almost leafless trees, and George West's teeth chattered, and
his ill-clad limbs grew numb as he walked along the fields leading
to Millwood.

This is an atom: 
"Lucky it's a dark night; this fine wind will fan the flame nicely,"
he repeated to himself.

This is an atom: 
The clock was striking nine, but all was quiet as midnight; not a
soul stirring, not a light in the parsonage windows that he could
see.

This is an atom: 
He dared not open the gate, lest the click of the latch should
betray him, so he softly climbed over; but scarcely had he dropped
on the other side of the wall before the loud barking of a dog
startled him.

This is an atom: 
He cowered down behind the hay-rick, scarcely daring to breathe,
expecting each instant that the dog would spring upon him. It was some
time before the boy dared to stir, and as his courage cooled, his
thirst for revenge somewhat subsided also, till he almost determined
to return to Lamborough; but he was too tired, too cold, too
hungry,--besides, the woman would beat him for staying out so late.

This is an atom: 
What could he do? where should he go? and as the sense of his lonely and
forlorn position returned, so did also the affectionate remembrance
of his father, his hatred of his accusers, his desire to satisfy his
vengeance; and, once more, courageous through anger, he rose,
took the box from his pocket, and boldly drew one of them across the
sand-paper.

This is an atom: 
It flamed; he stuck it hastily in the stack against which he rested,--it
only flickered a little, and went out. In great trepidation, young
West once more grasped the whole of the remaining matches in his
hand and ignited them, but at the same instant the dog barked.

This is an atom: 
He hears the gate open, a step is close to him, the matches are extinguished,
the lad makes a desperate effort to escape,--but a strong hand was laid
on his shoulder, and a deep calm voice inquired, "What can have urged
you to such a crime?" Then calling loudly, the gentleman, without
relinquishing his hold, soon obtained the help of some farming
men, who commenced a search with their lanterns all about the farm.

This is an atom: 
Of course they found no accomplices, nothing at all but the handful
of half-consumed matches the lad had dropped, and he all that time
stood trembling, and occasionally struggling, beneath the firm, but
not rough grasp of the master who held him.

This is an atom: 
At last the men were told to return to the house, and thither, by
a different path, was George led till they entered a small,
poorly-furnished room.

This is an atom: 
The walls were covered with books, as the bright flame of the fire revealed
to the anxious gaze of the little culprit.

This is an atom: 
The clergyman lit a lamp, and surveyed his prisoner attentively. The lad's
eyes were fixed on the ground, whilst Mr.

This is an atom: 
Leyton's wandered from his pale, pinched features to his scanty, ragged
attire, through the tatters of which he could discern the thin
limbs quivering from cold or fear; and when at last impelled by
curiosity at the long silence, George looked up, there was something
so sadly compassionate in the stranger's gentle look, that the boy
could scarcely believe that he was really the man whose evidence
had mainly contributed to transport his father.

This is an atom: 
Mary, born about 1525, married at Atherington, June 9, 1557
(Register), John Wollacombe of Combe, county Devon.  (Issue,--John,
Thomas, and Honor.--Harl.  Ms. 3288, folio 49.)

This is an atom: 
12.  James, born 1527 (Foxe's Acts and Monuments, Pratt's Townsend's
ed., Six 231), proctor of Bishop Gardiner, 1543 to 1555; Gentleman of
Chamber to Queen Mary, about 1556-8; died November 1558; buried Black
Friars' Church, London.  ("Machyn's Diary," page 179.)  Married Mary,
daughter of William Roper and Margaret his wife, daughter of Sir Thomas
More.

This is an atom: 
Issue of John Basset and Frances Plantagenet:--

This is an atom: 
1.  Honor, born at Calais, about May 10, 1539 (Lisle Papers, One 72;
Eleven 97; Twelve 85), probably died young.

This is an atom: 
2.  Sir Arthur, born 1540 (Inq. 1 March--2 Philip and Mary, 10),
probably at Calais; died of gaol fever, caught at the Black Assize,
Exeter (Stow's "Chronicle," page 719), April 2, 1586 (Epitaph); buried
at Atherington, April 7 (Register).  Married Eleanor, daughter of John
Chichester of Raleigh, county Devon, and Gertrude Courtenay of
Powderham; buried at Atherington, July 8, 1585 (Register).

This is an atom: 
Issue of Sir Arthur Basset and Eleanor Chichester:--

This is an atom: 
1.  Sir Robert, born 1574 (Matriculation Books, Queen's College,
Oxford); living 1620 (Anderson's.  "Royal Genealogies," page 745).
Claimed the Crown on death of Queen Elizabeth, as legal descendant of
Edward the Fourth.  He married Elizabeth, daughter and coh. of Sir
William Periam, Judge of the King's Bench; married November 21, 1591
(Register of Saint Dunstan in the West, London); died 1633.

This is an atom: 
2.  Anne, married after 1585 Sir John Chichester of Hall, county Devon;
died 1665; buried at Marwood.  (Left issue.)

This is an atom: 
3.  Margaret, under ten years old in 1585 (Will of Sir A. Basset).

This is an atom: 
4.  Arthur, under fourteen years old in 1585 (Will of Sir A. Basset).

This is an atom: 
5.  William, born 1583 (Matriculation Books, University College,
Oxford).

This is an atom: 
6.  Francis, baptised at Atherington, May 8, 1584 (Register).

This is an atom: 
7.  John, baptised at Atherington June 1, 1585 (Register).

This is an atom: 
Issue of Sir Robert Basset and Elizabeth Feriam:--

This is an atom: 
1.  Arthur, baptised June 6, 1593 (Register of Saint Dunstan in the
West, London); buried February 3, 1595 (Register of Saint Bartholemew
the Less, London).

This is an atom: 
2.  Anne, baptised October 16, 1594 (Register of Saint Bartholemew the
Less, London); married Jonathan Rashley of Fox (Harl.  Mss. 1091, folio
122; 1538, folio 280).

This is an atom: 
3.  Ellen, married George Yeo of Hushe (Harl.  Mss. 1091, folio 122;
1538, folio 280).

This is an atom: 
4.  Arthur, born at Heanton (Prince's "Worthies of Devon," page 113),
1598 (ibidem, Harl.  Ms. 1080, folio 343, b.); Colonel in King Charles's
army; died January 7, 1672; buried at Heanton (Prince, page 116).
Married Anne, daughter of William Leigh of Burrow, county Devon.

This is an atom: 
5.  Eleanor (Harl.  Ms. 1091, folio 122).

This is an atom: 
6.  Mary (Harl.  Ms. 1091, folio 122).

This is an atom: 
7.  William, born March 28, 1602-3 (Harl.  Ms. 1080, folio 343, b.;
Matriculation Books, Exeter College, Oxford).

This is an atom: 
Issue of Colonel Basset and Anne:--

This is an atom: 
1.  John, of Heanton, living [?] 1673.  Married Susannah, daughter of
(unknown).

This is an atom: 
2.  Arthur, entered at Oriel College, Oxford, 1652, (Matriculation
Books.)

This is an atom: 
3.  Francis, entered at Oriel College, Oxford, 1652 (Matriculation
Books.)

This is an atom: 
Issue of John Basset and Susannah:--

This is an atom: 
1.  John, born February 26, 1653 (Atherington Register).

This is an atom: 
2.  Arthur, born 1656 (Matriculation Books, Exeter College, Oxford).

This is an atom: 
3.  Francis, born April 13, 1657 (Atherington Register).  Married
(unknown), daughter of (unknown).

This is an atom: 
Issue of Francis Basset and (unknown):--

This is an atom: 
John, born 1688 (Matriculation Books, Exeter College, Oxford).

This is an atom: 
The male line of the Basset family died out with Francis Basset,
Esquire, in 1802; but the family estates remain in the hands of the
descendants of his eldest sister Eustachia, who married (Unknown) Davie
of Orleigh, and her posterity bear the name of Davie-Bassett.

This is an atom: 
The Younger Branches of the Family:--

This is an atom: 
Issue of George Basset and Jaquit Coffyn:--

This is an atom: 
1.  Mary, baptised December 11, 1558 (Atherington Register); probably
died young.

This is an atom: 
2.  John, baptised February 8, 1559 (Atherington Register), probably
died young.

This is an atom: 
3.  Katherine, baptised January 11, 1560 (Atherington Register).

This is an atom: 
4.  Blanche (Harl.  Ms. 1080, folio 344).

This is an atom: 
5.  James (Harl.  Ms. 1080, folio 344).  Married Jane, daughter of Sir
Francis Godolphin and Margaret Killigrew (ibidem).

This is an atom: 
Issue of James Basset and Jane Godolphin:--

This is an atom: 
1.  Thomas (Harl.  Ms. 1080, folio 344).

This is an atom: 
2.  Sir Francis, of Tehiddy, Cornwall; born 1594 (Matriculation Books,
Exeter College, Oxford); knighted 1620 (Harl.  Ms. 1080, folio 344).
Married Anne, daughter of Jonathan Trelawney of Trelawney.

This is an atom: 
3.  Arthur (Harl, Ms. 1080, folio 344).

This is an atom: 
4.  Nicholas (Harl, Ms. 1080, folio 344).

This is an atom: 
5.  James, born 1602 (Matriculation Books, Exeter College, Oxford).

This is an atom: 
6.  Margery (Harl.  Ms. 1080, folio 344).

This is an atom: 
7.  Jane, married William Courtenay (Harl.  Ms. 1080, folio 344).

This is an atom: 
8.  Grace (Harl.  Ms. 1080, folio 344).

This is an atom: 
9.  Margaret (Harl.  Ms. 1080, folio 344).

This is an atom: 
Issue of James Basset and Mary Roper:--

This is an atom: 
Philip, appointed Receiver of Revenues in Suffolk and Cambridgeshire,
October 1, 1584 (Rot.  Pat. 25 Elizabeth, Part 7).  Married (unknown),
daughter of (unknown) Verney (Harl.  Ms. 1091, folio 122).

This is an atom: 
Issue:--

This is an atom: 
Two daughters, names and alliances unknown (Harl Ms. 1080, folio 344).

This is an atom: 
I owe especial thanks to various persons who have most kindly helped me
in the elucidation of the above pedigree: in particular to Colonel
Chester, the Reverend G. Whitehead of Atherington, and Charles
Chichester, Esquire, of Hall.

This is an atom: 
HOWARD OF EFFINGHAM, CHARLES, LORD HIGH ADMIRAL.

This is an atom: 
The extracts which follow will show the reasons for the belief that Lord
Howard was a Protestant, possibly at the time of the Armada, and
certainly at a later period.

This is an atom: 
1559.  December 17.--He was an invited guest at the consecration of
Matthew Parker at Lambeth, as Archbishop of Canterbury, "and many years
after, by his testimony, confuted those lewd and loud lies which the
Papists tell of the Nag's Head in Cheapside."--(Fuller's "Worthies,"
quoted in Notes and Queries, 1st S.  Three, 244.)

This is an atom: 
1604.  February.--He was "at the head of a commission to discover and
expel all Catholic priests."--(Memorials of the Howard Family, quoted
ibidem, Three 309.--The quoter adds that Howard "was certainly a
Protestant in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.")

This is an atom: 
1604.  May [?] "Only we forewarn you that in the performance of these
ceremonies [ratification by King of Spain of treaty of peace with
England], which is likely to be done in the King's Chapel, you have
especial care that it be not done in the forenoon, in the time of Mass,
to the scandal of our religion, but rather in the afternoon, at what
time their service is more free from note of superstition."--(King James
the First to Lord Howard, then Earl of Nottingham and Ambassador to
Spain.  Biographies Brit, page 2679; quoted in Notes and Queries, 1st
S., Three 244.)

This is an atom: 
1604.  "On Friday, the last of this Month, His Catholick Majesty
ratified the Peace upon Oath in a great chamber of the Palace...  It was
pretended that the Clergy would not suffer this to be done in a Church
or Chapel where neglect of reverence of the Holy Sacrament should give
scandal."--(Collins' Peerage, Four 272, quoted ibidem.)

This is an atom: 
[It may be urged that Lord Howard, as Ambassador of a Protestant King,
would feel himself obliged to act on behalf of his master, showing no
more nor less reverence than James would have done himself.  But is it
at all likely that, had such been his wish, James would have selected
for this office a man who could not act according to the belief of his
master without committing sacrilege according to his own?  The want of
reverence must have been expected from Lord Nottingham or his suite, for
there was no one else present who was not a devout Romanist].

This is an atom: 
1605.  When Lord Monteagle delivered the anonymous letter winch revealed
the Gunpowder Plot to Lord Salisbury, the second person to whom the
latter confided the transaction was Lord Nottingham.--(Baker's
"Chronicle," page 508.)

This is an atom: 
1605.  He sat as one of the Commissioners for the trial of Garnet and
other conspirators, after the discovery of the Gunpowder
Plot--(Archaeologia, volume fifteen.)

This is an atom: 
1613.  He stood sponsor for the Countess of Salisbury's daughter.
(Calendar of State Papers, Domestic, 1611-1618, page 170; quoted in
Notes and Queries, 2nd S., Seven 364.)

This is an atom: 
1623.  May 20.--"John, son of Sir William Monson, is a dangerous Papist;
neither Garnet, Constable, nor Tobie Mathew is comparable to him.  He
asserts openly that the King is a Papist at heart ... and delights in
striving to pervert people...  Thinks it his duty, as Lieutenant of the
Shire, to inform against him."--(Lord Nottingham to Archbishop of
Canterbury, Calend.  State Papers, Domestic, James the First; quoted
ibidem, Seven 405.)

This is an atom: 
He married two Protestants; the first, a daughter of Henry Carey, Lord
Hunsdon; the second, of the "Bonnie" Earl of Moray.

This is an atom: 
THE END.

***************************************************************************