Document Name: /part1/suspicious-document00038.txt
Atom_Type: paragraph
Cluster_Method: combine_confidences
Plagiarized Atoms Count: 134/134
Non-Plagiarized Atoms Count: 0/134

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NON-PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is an atom: 
ï»¿"I shouldn't try, Spennie, if I were you. It's not the form of indoor
game at which you'd shine. Better stick to picquet."

This is an atom: 
"If you think I can't pay you your rotten money----"

This is an atom: 
"I do. But if you can, so much the better. Money is always useful."

This is an atom: 
"I may be a fool in some ways----"

This is an atom: 
"You understate it, my dear Spennie."

This is an atom: 
"But I'm not a cad."

This is an atom: 
"You're getting quite rosy, Spennie. Wrath is good for the
complexion."

This is an atom: 
"And if you think you can bribe me to do your dirty work, you never
made a bigger mistake in your life."

This is an atom: 
"Yes, I did," said Wesson, "when I thought you had some glimmerings of
intelligence. But if it gives you any pleasure to behave like the
juvenile lead in a melodrama, by all means do. Personally, I shouldn't
have thought the game would be worth the candle. Your keen sense of
honor, I understand you to say, will force you to pay your debt. It's
an expensive luxury nowadays, Spennie. You mentioned the end of the
week, I believe? That will suit me admirably. But if you change your
mind, my offer is still open. Good night, Galahad."

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XV.

This is an atom: 
For pure discomfort there are few things in the world that can compete
with the final rehearsals of an amateur theatrical performance at a
country house. Every day the atmosphere becomes more and more heavily
charged with restlessness and irritability. The producer of the piece,
especially if he is also the author of it, develops a sort of
intermittent insanity. He plucks at his mustache, if he has one; at
his hair, if he has not. He mutters to himself. He gives vent to
occasional despairing cries. The soothing suavity which marked his
demeanor in the earlier rehearsals disappears. He no longer says with
a winning smile: "Splendid, old man; splendid. Couldn't be better. But
I think we'll take that over just once more, if you don't mind. You
missed out a few rather good lines, and you forgot to give Miss
Robinson her cue for upsetting the flowerpot." Instead, he rolls his
eyes and snaps out: "Once more, please. This'll never do. At this rate
we might just as well cut out the show altogether. For Heaven's sake,
Brown, do try and remember your lines. It's no good having the best
part in the piece if you go and forget everything you've got to say.
What's that? All right on the night? No, it _won't_ be all right on
the night. And another thing. You _must_ remember to say, 'How calm
and peaceful the morning is', or how on earth do you think Miss Robinson
is going to know when to upset that flowerpot? Now, then, once more; and
do pull yourself together this time." After which the scene is sulkily
resumed by the now thoroughly irritated actors; and conversation, when
the parties concerned meet subsequently, is cold and strained.

This is an atom: 
Matters had reached this stage at the abbey. Everybody was thoroughly
tired of the piece, and, but for the thought of the disappointment
which--presumably--would rack the neighboring nobility and gentry
if it were not to be produced, would have resigned without a twinge
of regret. People who had schemed to get the best and longest parts
were wishing now that they had been content with _First Footman_ or
_Giles, a villager_.

This is an atom: 
"I'll never run an amateur show again as long as I live," confided
Charteris to Jimmy, almost tearfully the night before the production.
"It's not good enough. Most of them aren't word-perfect yet. And we've
just had the dress rehearsal!"

This is an atom: 
"It'll be all right on----"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, don't say it'll be all right on the night."

This is an atom: 
"I wasn't going to," said Jimmy. "I was going to say it'll be all
right after the night. People will soon forget how badly the thing
went."

This is an atom: 
"You're a nice, comforting sort of man, aren't you?" said Charteris.

This is an atom: 
"Why worry?" said Jimmy. "If you go on like this, it'll be Westminster
Abbey for you in your prime. You'll be getting brain fever."

This is an atom: 
Jimmy himself was feeling particularly cheerful. He was deriving a
keen amusement at present from the manoeuvres of Mr. Samuel Galer, of
New York. This lynx-eyed man, having been instructed by Mr. McEachern
to watch Jimmy, was doing so with a pertinacity which would have made
a man with the snowiest of consciences suspicious. If Jimmy went to
the billiard room after dinner, Mr. Galer was there to keep him
company. If, during the course of the day, he had occasion to fetch a
handkerchief or a cigarette case from his bedroom, he was sure, on
emerging, to stumble upon Mr. Galer in the corridor. The employees of
Wragge's Detective Agency, Ltd., believed in earning their salaries.
Occasionally, after these encounters, Jimmy would come upon Sir Thomas
Blunt's valet, the other man in whom Spike's trained eye had discerned
the distinguishing trait of the detective. He was usually somewhere
round the corner at these moments, and, when collided with, apologized
with great politeness. It tickled Jimmy to think that both these giant
brains should be so greatly exercised on his account.

This is an atom: 
Spennie, meanwhile, had been doing quite an unprecedented amount of
thinking. Quite an intellectual pallor had begun to appear on his
normally pink cheeks. He had discovered the profound truth that it is
one thing to talk about paying one's debts, another actually to do it,
and that this is more particularly the case when we owe twenty pounds
and possess but six pounds seven shillings and fourpence. Spennie was
acutely conscious of the fact that, if he could not follow up his
words to Wesson with actual coin, the result would be something of an
anticlimax. Somehow or other he would have to get the money--and at
once. The difficulty was that no one seemed at all inclined to lend it
to him.

This is an atom: 
There is a good deal to be said against stealing as a habit; but it
cannot he denied that, in certain circumstances, it offers an
admirable solution of a difficulty, and if the penalties were not so
exceedingly unpleasant, it is probable that it would become far more
fashionable than it is.

This is an atom: 
Spennie's mind did not turn immediately to this outlet from his
embarrassment. He had never stolen before, and it did not occur to him
directly to do so now. There is a conservative strain in all of us.
But gradually, as it was borne in upon him that it was the only course
possible, unless he applied to his stepfather--a task for which his
courage was not sufficient--he found himself contemplating the
possibility of having to secure the money by unlawful means. By lunch
time, on the morning of the day fixed for the theatricals, he had
decided definitely to do so. By dinner time he had fixed upon the
object of his attentions.

This is an atom: 
With a vague idea of keeping the thing in the family, he had resolved
to make his raid upon Sir Thomas Blunt. Somehow it did not seem so bad
robbing one's relatives.

This is an atom: 
A man's first crime is, as a rule, a shockingly amateurish affair. Now
and then, it is true, we find beginners forging with the accuracy of
old hands or breaking into houses with the finish of experts. But
these are isolated cases. The average tyro lacks generalship
altogether. Spennie may be cited as a typical novice. It did not
strike him that inquiries might be instituted by Sir Thomas, when he
found his money gone, and that Wesson, finding a man whom he knew to
be impecunious suddenly in possession of twenty pounds, might have
suspicions. His mind was entirely filled with the thought of getting
the money. There was no room in it for any other reflection.

This is an atom: 
His plan was simple. Sir Thomas, he knew, always carried a good deal
of money with him. It was unlikely that he kept this on his person in
the evening. A man to whom the set of his clothes is as important as
it was to Sir Thomas, does not carry a pocket-book full of banknotes
when he is dressed for dinner. He would leave it somewhere, reasoned
Spennie. Where, he asked himself. The answer was easy. In his dressing
room. Spennie's plan of campaign was complete.

This is an atom: 
The theatricals began at half-past eight. The audience had been
hustled into their seats, happier than is usual in such circumstances
from the rumor that the proceedings were to terminate with an informal
dance. The abbey was singularly well constructed for such a purpose.
There was plenty of room, and a sufficiency of retreat for those who
sat out, in addition to a conservatory large enough to have married
off half the couples in the county. The audience was in an excellent
humor, and the monologue, the first item of the programme, was
received with a warmth which gave Charteris, whom rehearsals had
turned into a pessimist, a faint hope that the main item on the
programme might not be the complete failure it had promised to be.

This is an atom: 
Spennie's idea had been to get through his burglarious specialty
during the monologue, when his absence would not be noticed. It might
be that if he disappeared later in the evening people would wonder
what had become of him.

This is an atom: 
He lurked apart till the last of the audience had taken their seats.
As he was passing through the hall, a hand fell on his shoulder.
Conscience makes cowards of us all. Spennie bit his tongue and leaped
three inches into the air.

This is an atom: 
"Hello, Charteris!" he said gaspingly.

This is an atom: 
"Spennie, my boyhood's only friend," said Charteris, "where are you
off to?"

This is an atom: 
"What--what do you mean? I was just going upstairs."

This is an atom: 
"Then don't. You're wanted. Our prompter can't be found. I want you to
take his place till he blows in. Come along."

This is an atom: 
The official prompter arrived at the end of the monologue with the
remark that he had been having a bit of a smoke in the garden and his
watch had gone wrong. Leaving him to discuss the point with Charteris,
Spennie slipped quietly away, and flitted up the stairs toward Sir
Thomas' dressing room. At the door, he stopped and listened. There was
no sound. The house might have been deserted. He opened the door, and
switched on the electric light.

This is an atom: 
Fortune was with him. On the dressing table, together with a bunch of
keys and some small change, lay a brown leather pocketbook. Evidently
Sir Thomas did not share Lady Blunt's impression that the world was
waiting for a chance to rob him as soon as his back was turned.

This is an atom: 
Spennie opened the pocketbook, and counted the contents. There were
two ten-pound notes, and four of five pounds.

This is an atom: 
He took a specimen of each variety, replaced the pocketbook, and crept
out of the door.

This is an atom: 
Then he walked rapidly down the corridor to his own room.

This is an atom: 
Just as he reached it, he received a shock only less severe than the
former one from the fact that this time no hand was placed on his
shoulder.

This is an atom: 
"Spennie!" cried a voice.

This is an atom: 
He turned, to see Molly. She wore the costume of the stage milkmaid.
Coming out of her room after dressing for her part, she had been in
time to see Spennie emerge through Sir Thomas' door with a look on his
face furtive enough to have made any jury bring in a verdict of guilty
on any count without further evidence. She did not know what he had
been doing; but she was very certain that it was something which he
ought to have left undone.

This is an atom: 
"Er--hullo, Molly!" said Spennie bonelessly.

This is an atom: 
"What were you doing in Uncle Thomas' room, Spennie?"

This is an atom: 
"Nothing. I was just looking round."

This is an atom: 
"Just looking round?"

This is an atom: 
"That's all."

This is an atom: 
Molly was puzzled.

This is an atom: 
"Why did you look like that when you came out?"

This is an atom: 
"Like what?"

This is an atom: 
"So guilty."

This is an atom: 
"Guilty! What _are_ you talking about?"

This is an atom: 
Molly suddenly saw light.

This is an atom: 
"Spennie," she said, "what were you putting in your pocket as you came
out?"

This is an atom: 
"Putting in my pocket!" said Spennie, rallying with the desperation of
one fighting a lost cause. "What do you mean?"

This is an atom: 
"You were putting something."

This is an atom: 
Another denial was hovering on Spennie's lips, when, in a flash, he
saw what he had not seen before, the cloud of suspicion which must
hang over him when the loss of the notes was discovered. Sir Thomas
would remember that he had tried to borrow money from him. Wesson
would wonder how he had become possessed of twenty pounds. And Molly
had actually seen him coming out of the room, putting something in his
pocket.

This is an atom: 
He threw himself at the mercy of the court.

This is an atom: 
"It's like this, Molly," he said. And, having prefaced his narrative
with the sound remark that he had been a fool, he gave her a summary
of recent events.

This is an atom: 
"I see," said Molly. "And you must pay him at once?"

This is an atom: 
"By the end of the week. We had--we had a bit of a row."

This is an atom: 
"What about?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, nothing," said Spennie. "Anyhow, I told him I'd pay him by
Saturday, and I don't want to have to climb down."

This is an atom: 
"Of course not. Jimmy shall lend you the money."

This is an atom: 
"Who? Jimmy Pitt?"

This is an atom: 
"Yes."

This is an atom: 
"But, I say, look here, Molly. I mean, I've been to him, already. He
lent me a fiver. He might kick if I tried to touch him again so soon."

This is an atom: 
"I'll ask him for it."

This is an atom: 
"But, look here, Molly----"

This is an atom: 
"Jimmy and I are engaged, Spennie."

This is an atom: 
"What! Not really? I say, I'm frightfully pleased. He's one of the
best. I'm fearfully glad. Why, that's absolutely topping. It'll be all
right. I'll sweat to pay him back. I'll save out of my allowance. I
can easily do it if I cut out a few things and don't go about so much.
You're a frightfully good sort, Molly. I say, will you ask him
to-night? I want to pay Wesson first thing to-morrow morning."

This is an atom: 
"Very well. You'd better give me those notes, Spennie. I'll put them
back."

This is an atom: 
The amateur cracksman handed over his loot, and retired toward the
stairs. Molly could hear him going down them three at a time, in a
whirl of relief and good resolutions. She went to Sir Thomas' room,
and replaced the notes. Having done this, she could not resist the
temptation to examine herself in the glass for a few moments. Then she
turned away, switched off the light, and was just about to leave the
room when a soft footstep in the passage outside came to her ears.

This is an atom: 
She shrank back. She felt a curiously guilty sensation, as if she had
been in the room with criminal rather than benevolent intentions. Her
motives in being where she was were excellent--but she would wait till
this person had passed before coming out into the passage.

This is an atom: 
Then it came to her with a shock that the person was not going to
pass. The footsteps halted outside the door.

This is an atom: 
There was a curtain at her side, behind which hung certain suits of
Sir Thomas'. She stepped noiselessly behind this.

This is an atom: 
The footsteps passed on into the room.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XVI.

This is an atom: 
Jimmy had gone up to his room to put on the costume he was to wear in
the first act at about the time when Spennie was being seized upon by
Charteris to act as prompter. As he moved toward the stairs, a
square-cut figure appeared.

This is an atom: 
It was the faithful Galer.

This is an atom: 
There was nothing in his appearance to betray the detective to the
unskilled eye, but years of practice had left Spike with a sort of
sixth sense as regarded the force. He could pierce the subtlest
disguise. Jimmy had this gift in an almost equal degree, and it had
not needed Mr. Galer's constant shadowing of himself to prove to Jimmy
the correctness of Spike's judgment. He looked at the representative
of Wragge's Detective Agency, Ltd., as he stood before him now, taking
in his every detail: the square, unintelligent face; the badly cut
clothes; the clumsy heels; the enormous feet.

This is an atom: 
"And this," he said to himself, "is the man McEachern thinks capable
of tying my hands!" There were moments when the spectacle of Mr. Galer
filled Jimmy with an odd sort of fury, a kind of hurt professional
pride. The feeling that this espionage was a direct challenge enraged
him. Behind this clumsy watcher he saw always the self-satisfied
figure of Mr. McEachern. He seemed to hear him chuckling to himself.

This is an atom: 
"If it wasn't for Molly," he said to himself, "I'd teach McEachern a
lesson. I'm trying to hold myself in, and he sets these fool
detectives onto me. I shouldn't mind if he'd chosen somebody who knew
the rudiments of the game, but Galer! Galer!

This is an atom: 
"Well, Mr. Galer," he said, aloud, "you aren't trying to escape, are
you? You're coming in to see the show, aren't you?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, yes," said the detective. "Jest wanted to go upstairs for 'alf a
minute. You coming, too?"

This is an atom: 
"I was going to dress," said Jimmy, as they went up. "See you later,"
he added, at the door. "Hope you'll like the show."

This is an atom: 
He went into his room. Mr. Galer passed on.

This is an atom: 
*       *       *       *       *

This is an atom: 
Jimmy had finished dressing, and had picked up a book to occupy the
ten minutes before he would be needed downstairs, when there burst
into the room Spike Mullins, in a state of obvious excitement.

This is an atom: 
"Gee, Mr. Chames!"

This is an atom: 
"Hello, Spike."

This is an atom: 
Spike went to the door, opened it, and looked up and down the passage.

This is an atom: 
"Mr. Chames," he said, in a whisper, shutting the door, "there's bin
doin's to-night for fair. Me coco's still buzzin'. Say, I was to Sir
Thomas' dressin' room----"

This is an atom: 
"What! What were you doing there?"

This is an atom: 
Spike looked somewhat embarrassed. He grinned apologetically, and
shuffled his feet.

This is an atom: 
"I've got dem, Mr. Chames," he said.

This is an atom: 
"Got them? Got what?"

This is an atom: 
"Dese."

This is an atom: 
He plunged his hand in his pocket, and drew forth a glittering mass.
Jimmy's jaw dropped as he gazed at Lady Blunt's rope of pearls.

This is an atom: 
"Two hundred t'ousand plunks," murmured Spike, gazing lovingly at
them. "I says to myself, Mr. Chames ain't got no time to be getting'
after dem himself. He's too busy dese days wit' jollyin' along the
swells. So it's up to me, I says, 'cos Mr. Chames'll be tickled to
deat', all right, all right, if we can git away wit' dem. So I----"

This is an atom: 
Jimmy gave tongue with an energy which amazed his faithful follower.

This is an atom: 
"Spike! You lunatic! Didn't I tell you there was nothing doing when
you wanted to take those things the other day?"

This is an atom: 
"Sure, Mr. Chames. But dose was little dinky t'ings. Dese poils is
boids, for fair."

This is an atom: 
"Good heavens, Spike, you must be mad. Can't you see--Oh, Lord!
Directly the loss of those pearls is discovered, we shall have those
detectives after us in a minute. Didn't you know they had been
watching us?"

This is an atom: 
An involuntary chuckle escaped Spike.

This is an atom: 
"'Scuse me, Mr. Chames, but dat's funny about dem sleut's. Listen.
Dey's bin an' arrest each other."

This is an atom: 
"What!"

This is an atom: 
"Dat's right. Dey had a scrap in de dark, each finking de odder was
after de jools, an' not knowin' dey was bote sleut's, an' now one of
dem's bin an' taken de odder off, an' locked him in de cellar."

This is an atom: 
"What on earth do you mean?"

This is an atom: 
Spike giggled at the recollection.

This is an atom: 
"Listen, Mr. Chames, it's dis way. I'm in de dressin' room, chasin'
around wit' dis lantern here for de jool box"--he produced from his
other pocket a small bicycle lamp--"and just as I gets a line on it,
gee! I hears a footstep comin' down de passage straight for de door.
Was to de bad? Dat's right. Gee, I says to m'self, here's one of de
sleut' guys what's bin an' got wise to me, and he's comin' in to put
de grip on me. So I gets up, an' I blows out de lantern, and I stands
dere in de dark, waitin' for him to come in. And den I'm going to get
busy before he can see who I am, and jolt him one on de point, and
den, while he's down and out, chase meself for de soivants' hall."

This is an atom: 
"Yes?" said Jimmy.

This is an atom: 
"Well, dis guy, he gets to de door, and opens it, and I'm just goin'
to butt in, when dere suddenly jumps out from de room on de odder side
de passage anodder guy, and gets de rapid strangleholt on dis foist
mug. Say, wouldn't dat make you wonder was you on your feet or your
coco?"

This is an atom: 
"Go on. What happened, then?"

This is an atom: 
"Dey begins to scrap good and hard in de dark. Dey couldn't see me,
and I couldn't see dem, but I could hear dem bumpin' about an'
sluggin' each odder, all right, all right. And by an' by one of dem
puts de odder to de bad, so dat he goes down and takes de count; an'
den I hears a click. And I know what dat is. One of de guys has put de
irons on de odder guy. Den I hears him strike a light--I'd turned de
switch what lights up de passage before I got into de room--and den he
says, 'Ah', he says, 'got youse, have I? Not the boid I expected, but
you'll do.' I knew his voice. It was dat mug what calls himself
Galer."

This is an atom: 
"I suppose I'm the bird he expected," said Jimmy. "Well?"

This is an atom: 
"De odder mug was too busy catchin' up wit' his breat' to shoot it
back swift, but after he's bin doin' de deep breathin' stunt for a
while, he says, 'You mutt', he says, 'youse to de bad. You've made a
break, you have.' He put it different, but dat's what he meant. Den he
says that he's a sleut', too. Does de Galer mug give him de glad eye?
Not on your life. He says dat dat's de woist tale that's ever bin
handed to him. De odder mug says, 'I'm Sir Tummas' vally', he says.
'Aw, cut it out', says Galer. 'Sure youse ain't Sir Tummas himself?'
'Show me to him', says de foist guy, 'den you'll see.' 'Not on your
life', says Galer. 'What! Butt in among de swells what's enjoyin'
themselves and spoil deir evenin' by showin' dem a face like yours? To
de woods! It's youse for de coal cellar, me man, and we'll see what
youse has got to say afterward. G'wan!' And off dey went. And I lit me
lantern again, got de jools, and chased meself here."

This is an atom: 
Jimmy stretched out his hand.

This is an atom: 
"All very exciting," he said. "And now you'll just hand me those
pearls, and I'll seize the opportunity while the coast is clear to put
them back where they belong."

This is an atom: 
Only for a moment did Spike hesitate. Then he pulled out the jewels,
and placed them in Jimmy's hand. Mr. Chames was Mr. Chames, and what
he said went. But his demeanor was tragic, telling eloquently of hopes
blighted.

This is an atom: 
Jimmy took the necklace with a thrill. He was an expert in jewels, and
a fine gem affected him much as a fine picture affects the artistic.
He went to the light, and inspected them gloatingly.

This is an atom: 
As he did so, he uttered a surprised exclamation. He ran the jewels
through his fingers. He scrutinized them again, more closely this
time.

This is an atom: 
Then he turned to Spike, with a curious smile.

This is an atom: 
"You'd better be going downstairs," he said. "I'll just run along and
replace them. Where is the box?"

This is an atom: 
"It's on de floor against de wall, near de window, Mr. Chames."

This is an atom: 
"Good. Better give me that lamp."

This is an atom: 
There was no one in the passage. He raced softly along it to Sir
Thomas Blunt's dressing room.

This is an atom: 
He lit his lamp, and found the box without difficulty. Dropping the
necklace in, he closed down the lid.

This is an atom: 
"They'll want a new lock, I'm afraid," he said. "However!"

This is an atom: 
He rose to his feet.

This is an atom: 
"Jimmy!" said a startled voice.

This is an atom: 
He whipped round. The light of the lamp fell on Molly, standing, pale
and open-eyed, beside the curtain by the door.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XVII.

This is an atom: 
Pressed, rigid, against the wall behind her curtain, Molly had
listened in utter bewilderment to the sounds of strife in the passage
outside. The half-heard conversation between the detectives had done
nothing toward a solution of the mystery. Galer's voice she thought
she recognized as one that she had heard before; but she could not
identify it.

This is an atom: 
When the detectives had passed away together down the corridor, she
had imagined that the adventure was at an end and that she was at
liberty to emerge--cautiously--from her hiding place and follow them
downstairs. She had stretched out a hand, to draw the curtain aside,
when she caught sight of the yellow ray of the lamp on the floor, and
shrank back again. As she did so, she heard the sound of breathing.
Somebody was still in the room.

This is an atom: 
Her mystification deepened. She had supposed that the tale of visitors
to the dressing room was complete with the two who had striven in the
passage. Yet here was another.

***************************************************************************