Document Name: /part1/suspicious-document01957.txt
Atom_Type: paragraph
Cluster_Method: kmeans
Plagiarized Atoms Count: 0/1523
Non-Plagiarized Atoms Count: 1523/1523

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NON-PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is an atom: 
ï»¿Distributed Proofreading Team

This is an atom: 
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT THE HOSTESS HOUSE

This is an atom: 
Or, Doing Their Best for the Soldiers

This is an atom: 
by

This is an atom: 
LAURA LEE HOPE

This is an atom: 
Author of _The Outdoor Girls of Deepdale_, _The Moving Picture Girls_,
_The Bobbsey Twins_, _Bunny Brown and His Sister Sue_, _Six Little
Bunkers at Grandma Bell's_, etc.

This is an atom: 
Illustrated

This is an atom: 
New York
Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers

This is an atom: 
*        *        *        *        *

This is an atom: 
BOOKS FOR GIRLS

This is an atom: 
BY LAURA LEE HOPE

This is an atom: 
12mo. Cloth. Illustrated.

This is an atom: 
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS SERIES

This is an atom: 
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS OF DEEPDALE
    THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT RAINBOW LAKE
    THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A MOTOR CAR
    THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A WINTER CAMP
    THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN FLORIDA
    THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT OCEAN VIEW
    THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ON PINE ISLAND
    THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN ARMY SERVICE
    THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT THE HOSTESS HOUSE

This is an atom: 
THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS SERIES

This is an atom: 
THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS AT OAK FARM
    THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS SNOWBOUND
    THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS UNDER THE PALMS
    THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS AT ROCKY RANCH
    THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS AT SEA
    THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS IN WAR PLAYS

This is an atom: 
THE BOBBSEY TWINS SERIES
(Twelve Titles)

This is an atom: 
THE BUNNY BROWN SERIES
(Eight Titles)

This is an atom: 
SIX LITTLE BUNKERS SERIES
(Five Titles)

This is an atom: 
Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York

This is an atom: 
*        *        *        *        *

This is an atom: 
THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT THE HOSTESS HOUSE

This is an atom: 
CONTENTS

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER
        I HERO WORSHIP
       II THE ACCIDENT
      III THE SHADOW OF MYSTERY
       IV MRS. SANDERSON'S STORY
        V FUN AND SOLDIERS
       VI PLANNING CAPTURE
      VII A LARK IN THE OPEN
     VIII ENTER SERGEANT MULLINS
       IX THE BAYONET DRILL
        X ALARMING SYMPTOMS
       XI POLITE KIDNAPPERS
      XII WHERE LOVE IS DEAF
     XIII THE COPPERHEAD
      XIV THE REINS TIGHTEN
       XV THE FATEFUL DAY
      XVI SPARRING FOR TIME
     XVII TEARS AND PATRIOTISM
    XVIII AFTER THE BOYS LEFT
      XIX REAL TRAGEDY
       XX THE MOTORCYCLIST AGAIN
      XXI THE CHASE
     XXII STARTLING DEVELOPMENTS
    XXIII THE MIRACLE
     XXIV MYSTERY EXPLAINED
      XXV TO "CARRY ON"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER I

This is an atom: 
HERO WORSHIP

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Mollie, please be careful!"

This is an atom: 
The big car skidded perilously around a sharp curve and chug-chugged
merrily down the road.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, I've been careful so long I'm afraid it will grow on me,"
Mollie Billette, sometimes known as "Billy," retorted, a determined set to
her pretty chin. "Someway, I've got to get it out of my system."

This is an atom: 
The automobile, a big seven-passenger car, belonged to Mollie, and the
four Outdoor Girls, having secured a half-holiday from their work at the
Hostess House, were out for recreation.

This is an atom: 
As may have been gathered, Mollie was driving. Amy Blackwell, fearful of
an accident, was in the seat beside her, while Grace Ford and Betty
Nelson, their beloved Little Captain, occupied the tonneau and amused
themselves by laughing at Amy's fears.

This is an atom: 
"Well, but you needn't take it out on us," Amy said in reply to Mollie's
assertion. "If you're going to take many more of those two-wheel turns,
I'm going to get out and walk. Oh, Mol-lie!" The speech ended in a wail,
as Mollie wickedly rounded another curve, jolting Amy half out of her
seat.

This is an atom: 
"I don't know but what I agree with Amy," drawled Grace, from the tonneau,
helping herself to a chocolate, upon which Betty's eye had just rested
longingly. "I've been bumped around so much I can't tell whether I'm a
girl or a scrambled egg. Now, look what you did!" A sudden lurch of the
big car had sent the box of chocolates to the floor, where its contents
rolled about aggravatingly at their feet. "Come back here, Mollie
Billette, and pick them up. That's the least--"

This is an atom: 
The rest of the sentence was never uttered, for Mollie brought the car to
so sudden a stop that Grace and Betty both lurched forward and narrowly
escaped bumping their noses on the back of the seat in front of them.

This is an atom: 
"Sure," said the reckless driver, turning her bright black eyes
expectantly upon them. "Will you promise to give me all I pick up?"

This is an atom: 
"All you--" Grace was beginning, striving desperately to recover her
breath and her dignity at the same time, the accomplishment of which feat
was decidedly retarded by growing indignation. "Goodness, I never heard
such a--"

This is an atom: 
"Very well," returned Mollie, and, without deigning to parley further,
turned determinedly to the wheel. "That's all I wanted to know--"

This is an atom: 
"Just a minute, Mollie, dearest," Betty's laughing voice broke in. "You
know I'm not worrying about the chocolates at all, but I'm not
particularly anxious to spoil my perfectly good shoes with crushed
chocolate or, on the other hand, frump my perfectly good nose in a vain
attempt to pick them--"

This is an atom: 
"Which, candy or shoes?" Mollie broke in impishly.

This is an atom: 
"Candy," answered Betty soberly. "As I was saying, neither of these
alternatives appeal to me, so, with your kind permission, I would beg you
to hold your horses--"

This is an atom: 
"As the vulgar herd would say," again murmured Mollie.

This is an atom: 
"Exactly--as the vulgar herd would say," agreed Betty, dimpling adorably,
"--until we have a chance to collect the scattered sweets."

This is an atom: 
"You win," Mollie capitulated, speaking in a tone reserved for the "Little
Captain." "Only please make Grace hurry or the afternoon will be over
before she begins."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, listen to it--" Grace was beginning, straightening indignantly
from her stooping posture and preparing once more to enter the fray. "When
it's all her fault, anyway--" But Betty upset both speech and dignity by
unceremoniously pulling her down again.

This is an atom: 
"Come on! Hurry, Gracie!" she commanded. "And don't overlook any, because
there's nothing so messy as a chocolate--"

This is an atom: 
"As if there were any chance of Grace's overlooking a chocolate!" scoffed
Mollie. "Why, all she has to do is whistle to 'em and they come rolling up
obediently."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, who'd want them anyway, after they've rolled around and picked
up all the dust and millions of germs from the bottom of the car?"
grumbled Grace, cross at having to exert herself to even so small an
extent. Grace, as my old readers doubtless remember, had been born with an
ease-loving disposition that not even close association with the other
Outdoor Girls had served to change. Perhaps, as Mollie had once remarked,
that was why the girls were so fond of her--because she was "so
different."

This is an atom: 
"Well, if you don't want 'em," Mollie replied practically, "why didn't you
agree to my proposition? I promised to eat them for you, germs and all,
and all I got for my sacrifice was one withering glance--"

This is an atom: 
"At that you're lucky," Grace retorted, straightening up from a spirited
chase of the last elusive chocolate, red of face and fierce of eye. "Some
time I'll come to the end of my patience, and then, Mollie Billette, you'd
better look out."

This is an atom: 
"My!" chuckled Betty, "isn't she fierce? Never mind, honey, Roy will give
you another box, if you ask him very prettily."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, if he can't do it without being asked," retorted Grace crossly,
"he can keep his old candies."

This is an atom: 
"If I thought you meant that, I'd say you ought to be ashamed of
yourself," put in Amy, with unaccustomed spirit, as Mollie threw in the
clutch and the big car started off again. "Anybody that had been as good
to you as Roy has been--"

This is an atom: 
"Well, I don't know that you've been particularly neglected," retorted
Grace, meaningly, while Amy reddened. "I never thought that Will could be
such a perfect Romeo."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, dear," murmured Betty protestingly. "Can't we have just one good
time, without bringing the boys into it?"

This is an atom: 
"Now, see who's talking," chuckled Mollie delightedly, changing into high
and driving with wild, care-free recklessness along the smooth road. "Oh,
Betty darling, much as I love you, there do come times when you make me
laugh."

This is an atom: 
"Well, it's good to know I'm bringing happiness into some dark life,"
retorted Betty good-naturedly. "At least I have not lived in vain."

This is an atom: 
"And they were just mad," Mollie continued, as though talking to herself,
"when they found we were going off this afternoon without them."

This is an atom: 
"Yes, and isn't it funny?" agreed Grace lazily. "They think they're so
important."

This is an atom: 
"Well, they are," announced Amy suddenly, and even Mollie turned an amazed
eye upon her.

This is an atom: 
"I think they're the most important people in the world," Amy continued
stoutly. "I guess if we were going to give up our lives for somebody else
we might think we were important, too."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, I didn't mean that way," Mollie returned, her eyes once more turning
to the ribbon of road ahead while the girls' bright faces sobered
thoughtfully. "Because when it comes to a thing like giving up their
lives--well, I think they're the bravest--" Her voice broke, and in an
effort to hide her emotion she nearly sent the car over the side of the
road and into a six-foot ditch.

This is an atom: 
"Brave," repeated Betty, turning her eyes to the far horizon to hide the
mist that suddenly gathered in them. "I don't think that's any word for
our boys at all--"

This is an atom: 
"They don't seem to realize what they're going into," Amy broke in
eagerly. "Or, if they do, they won't talk about it, or let any one else--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, I guess it isn't that they don't realize it," Grace interrupted
thoughtfully. "You know my father always used to say that a man who never
knew what it was to be afraid wasn't really brave at all. He said it was
the man who was scared to death in his heart, that gritted his teeth and
went ahead and faced things anyway, that deserves all the credit."

This is an atom: 
"I presume that's right," said the Little Captain, leaning forward
earnestly. "I don't suppose there is any one in the world who really
enjoys the thought of losing an arm or a leg, or being broken in health
for the rest of his life. I think what our boys are doing is just to take
the fear of that with a smile and go ahead gayly to face whatever may
come. Brave--" Her voice trailed off, and for a long time there was
silence while the big car hummed rhythmically along the road and the miles
swept by uncounted.

This is an atom: 
"Of course, there are lots of people," Betty resumed after a while, "who
say the boys just enlisted for the love of adventure, the love of a good
fight, and I suppose that had something to do with it."

This is an atom: 
"Of course it had," Mollie agreed. "And that's one thing that makes it
harder for us who have to stay at home and can't have any of the thrill
and excitement that helps to carry the boys through. But it's only one of
a dozen reasons, after all."

This is an atom: 
"I wish we knew when they were going," said Grace, irrelevantly. "The
suspense is worse than anything else. It's like cutting a dog's tail off
an inch at a time."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, isn't she complimentary?" flung back Mollie, laughing. "You can
compare yourself to a four-footed dog, Grace, but please leave me out of
it."

This is an atom: 
"Did you ever hear of a two-footed dog?" Grace retorted.

This is an atom: 
"To change the subject," Betty interposed hastily, seeking to avoid a
storm. "Don't you think it's almost time to be turning back? We've gone
farther than--Oh, Mollie! Girls! Look!"

This is an atom: 
They had rounded a curve in the road at their usual breakneck speed, and
Mollie stopped the car with a jolt that very nearly sent its occupants
flying into the roadway.

This is an atom: 
Before them, not twenty yards away, a little figure in black lay huddled
in the road while the motorcyclist who had caused the accident, sped by
the girls, exhaust open and head lowered.

This is an atom: 
Dazedly they gazed after machine and rider for a minute till they
disappeared round a turn in the road. Then, with a cry of dismay, Betty
tumbled out of the car, followed by the other girls.

This is an atom: 
The prostrate figure in the road lay very, very still.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER II

This is an atom: 
THE ACCIDENT

This is an atom: 
"Betty, is she dead?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, I hope not," said Betty, white-faced and pitying, as she bent over
the little old woman. "That man ought to be hung! I'll loosen her collar.
And, Grace, see if you can find some water. Hurry, dear."

This is an atom: 
And while the girls are ministering to the poor little victim of the
accident, the opportunity will be taken to tell new readers something
about the Outdoor Girls and their activities and adventures in other
volumes of this series.

This is an atom: 
Betty Nelson, gay and fun-loving, possessed the natural gift of leadership
which had earned for her the title of "Little Captain." The girls adored
her and followed her unquestioningly wherever she led.

This is an atom: 
Grace Ford was a graceful, tall, pretty girl with a decided and insatiable
fondness for chocolate candy. At the outbreak of the war, or rather, at
the time of America's entry into the war, her brother Will had caused her
great unhappiness by his failure to enlist with the other boys of her
acquaintance. The mystery had been satisfactorily explained later,
however, and when this story opens, Will was on his way to make a splendid
soldier in America's army of democracy.

This is an atom: 
There was a bit of French blood in Mollie Billette, or "Billy," as the
girls sometimes called her. Bright black eyes which could, upon occasion,
snap fire and a rather unruly temper attested to this French ancestry.

This is an atom: 
The last one of the quartette was Amy Blackford, quiet and retiring, but
given to occasional outbursts which never failed to surprise and delight
the girls. The mystery which at one time had surrounded her origin had
been cleared up some years before by the finding of Henry Blackford, her
long-lost brother.

This is an atom: 
How the girls formed a camping and tramp club and the fun they had on
their interesting and adventurous tour, has been told in the first volume
of the series, entitled "The Outdoor Girls of Deepdale."

This is an atom: 
After this the girls had many adventures, first at Rainbow Lake, to which
they went on another tour, this time in an automobile. From there they
went to a winter camp where they had many varied and exciting experiences
on skates and iceboats. Then followed a glorious trip to Florida, where
the girls braved many dangers and took thrilling trips into the wilds of
the interior.

This is an atom: 
Their next adventure took them to Ocean View and centered about a
mysterious box they found in the sand.

This is an atom: 
Then followed that glorious trip to Pine Island. An aunt of Mollie
Billette had turned her bungalow over to the Outdoor Girls for the summer.
During their strenuous adventures the girls had made many friends among
the boys and young men of Deepdale, and four of these had asked and been
granted permission by the girls to accompany them to Pine Island and pitch
their camp in the woods near by.

This is an atom: 
One of the young men was Allen Washburn, a rising young lawyer and a great
admirer of Betty. Another was Will Ford, Grace's brother, and a third was
his high school chum, Frank Haley. The fourth, Roy Anderson, had been
drawn into the circle chiefly through his admiration for Grace.

This is an atom: 
During that eventful summer on Pine Island the young people had
accidentally discovered a gypsy cave, concealed by underbrush, and had
succeeded not only in rounding up the band of gypsies but in recovering
several valuable articles that had been stolen from the girls.

This is an atom: 
Their last adventure, related in the volume directly preceding this one,
and entitled "Outdoor Girls in Army Service," found the girls and boys
again at Pine Island, but under very much altered conditions. America had
entered the great World War and all the boys but Will Ford had
volunteered. Later, the boys were called to Camp Liberty, some distance
from Deepdale, and the girls conceived the plan of opening a Hostess House
for the benefit of the relatives and friends of the boys. The plan worked
out very satisfactorily.

This is an atom: 
While still at Pine Island the girls and boys had come upon a suspicious
looking man in the woods. Upon finding himself discovered the man had made
his escape, but in his hurry had dropped a letter which the girls found to
their disgust was written in code. They decided that the man must have
been a German spy.

This is an atom: 
At Camp Liberty the girls succeeded in rounding up the spy, and found, to
their surprise, that Will Ford, who was in the Secret Service, had been
engaged all that time in tracking him to earth. Will, having accomplished
his mission, immediately enlisted.

This is an atom: 
Now, at the time this story opens, the girls were still at the Hostess
House and looking forward apprehensively to the time, now imminent, when
the boys would be ordered across the sea to fight for the country they
loved.

This is an atom: 
"I'll go with Grace," volunteered Amy, in answer to Betty's request for
water. "I don't suppose we can find any, but we'll try."

This is an atom: 
The two girls hurried off, leaving Mollie and Betty to loosen the woman's
collar and rub her cold hands.

This is an atom: 
"Betty, Betty, is she dead?" Mollie was crying for perhaps the hundredth
time, when the woman herself answered the question by opening her eyes and
looking vacantly about her.

This is an atom: 
"Who--are--you?" she queried faintly, struggling to rise.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, please don't try to get up just yet," Betty pleaded, looking very
sweet and charming in her solicitude. "I don't think you're strong
enough--"

This is an atom: 
But the woman seemed of a different mind, and made such a desperate effort
to raise herself that Betty had no alternative but to help her to her
feet.

This is an atom: 
The girls supported the unsteady little figure while the dim old eyes
roved questioningly about.

This is an atom: 
"I--got--hurt!" she gasped, and then quite suddenly fainted again.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Betty!" moaned Mollie, her face white with pity. "She's hurt worse,
much worse, than we thought she was! Oh, what shall we do?"

This is an atom: 
"There's only one thing to do," replied Betty, trying to hide the tremor
in her voice. "We'll have to get her to the hospital, and in a hurry."

This is an atom: 
"But Grace and Amy!" gasped Mollie. "We can't go without them."

This is an atom: 
"We can at least get her into the car," Betty said, indicating the limp
little figure in the roadway. "You take her feet, Mollie, and I'll take
her head. We haven't spent all our lives outdoors for nothing."

This is an atom: 
Between them they succeeded in carrying their burden to the car and
settled her gently in the tonneau.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, if Grace and Amy would only come!" Mollie was crying distractedly
when the girls themselves burst through the underbrush, crying
despairingly that they had not been able to find water, that there was not
a house anywhere for miles around.

This is an atom: 
But Betty cut their lamentations short and hurried them into the car.

This is an atom: 
"But where do I come in?" gasped Grace, as Betty dropped into the back
seat beside the little old woman and took the poor unconscious head in her
arms.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, anywhere," answered Betty indifferently, her mind on one object only.
"On the floor or on the roof or anywhere, only hurry. Now, Mollie dear,
drive as you never drove before."

This is an atom: 
Mollie obediently threw in the clutch, and the heavy car shot forward,
throwing Grace to a seat on the floor where she fell with more haste than
dignity.

This is an atom: 
Nobody noticed her, however, and even a growing bump on her forehead
received scant attention. All were too intent upon the matter at hand.

This is an atom: 
At this spot the road was very narrow and on each side sloped down sharply
about ten or twelve feet to the level of the fields. It seemed almost an
impossibility to turn the car in that narrow space without precipitating
it down either one or the other of the steep banks.

This is an atom: 
After many fruitless attempts and barely escaped tragedies, however,
Mollie finally succeeded, and the car was sent flying down the white
stretch of road that led to Camp Liberty and the hospital.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, I hope we'll get there in time," Amy murmured over and over again,
and kept looking at the pathetic little victim. "Is she still breathing,
Betty? Are you sure?"

This is an atom: 
To this Betty always nodded in the affirmative, her little mouth grimly
set, her eyes fixed steadily ahead, as though she would draw their
destination nearer to them by the very force of her desire.

This is an atom: 
"I wonder," Mollie flung back at them from between clenched teeth, "what
that motorcyclist looked like. I'd like to meet him again--with a firing
squad."

This is an atom: 
"Why I saw him," came Grace's muffled voice from the floor of the car.

This is an atom: 
"So did I," added Amy.

This is an atom: 
"So you would recognize him again?" Mollie demanded eagerly, swerving the
car perilously near the edge of the road.

This is an atom: 
"Are you sure?" added Betty, taking her eyes from the far horizon and
regarding Grace intently.

This is an atom: 
Both girls nodded vigorously.

This is an atom: 
"His head was down, of course," Amy continued, "but I'd know his face in a
minute if I saw it again. Eyes close together, long nose--"

This is an atom: 
"And a little mustache," Grace finished eagerly. "The kind Percy Falconer
used to wear and we girls called an eyebrow on his lip."

This is an atom: 
"He must have been a thing of beauty," commented Mollie.

This is an atom: 
"He had the meanest kind of face," said Amy, with a little shudder. "The
kind you wouldn't like to meet on a dark night."

This is an atom: 
"I should have judged as much from your description," said Betty dryly.
"There's one good thing about him--we ought to be able to recognize him
easily."

This is an atom: 
"You talk as though you expected to meet him again," said Amy, looking at
her curiously.

This is an atom: 
"I do," answered Betty determinedly. "Some time we're going to find that
fellow and make him pay for what he's done. Think of it!" she added,
turning upon them suddenly while her eyes flashed fire. "To run down a
helpless old woman in the road and then not even stop to find out whether
you've killed her or not! We'll find him if we have to search the country
for fifty miles around!"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER III

This is an atom: 
THE SHADOW OF MYSTERY

This is an atom: 
The girls never forgot that mad ride to Camp Liberty. Mile after mile sped
by on wings, and it was not till they were on the outskirts of the town
itself that the victim of the accident showed signs of returning
consciousness.

This is an atom: 
Then she sighed, moved her head a little restlessly on Betty's shoulder,
and opened her eyes.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, dear," she said, faintly but so abruptly that Betty and Grace
started. "I knew I'd have--to do it--some day!"

This is an atom: 
When the girls came to know her better they no longer wondered at her
quaint and unexpected sayings. But at the moment this queer statement,
coming as it did from one who they thought must be hovering at death's
door, rather startled them.

This is an atom: 
"Wh--what?" stammered Betty, bewildered, while the others stared with wide
eyes. "What did you say?"

This is an atom: 
"I said," replied the surprising old woman, in a stronger voice, trying
unsteadily to straighten herself in the seat and raising trembling hands
to her rather dilapidated old hat, "that I was sure to come to it some
day. There's a fate in such things."

This is an atom: 
The girls looked at each other uncertainly, and into the minds of each
flashed the startled suspicion that perhaps the poor old soul was mentally
defective. Or, maybe, the accident--

This is an atom: 
The woman seemed to sense something of their bewilderment, and into her
eyes, still bright in spite of her age and what she had just gone through,
there came a twinkle--yes, a real twinkle.

This is an atom: 
"No, I'm not crazy," she assured them, regaining her strength with amazing
quickness. "You see, it seemed kind o' funny to me after all these years
o' swearin' that I'd never ride in one o' these gasoline cars to find
myself in one after all,--and at my time o' life."

This is an atom: 
The girls gasped with relief, but still had the strange feeling of one who
has been speeding over the water with all sails set and suddenly finds
herself in the midst of a dead calm.

This is an atom: 
"B-but," stammered Amy, voicing the general sentiment, "we thought--were
afraid--you were hurt badly--"

This is an atom: 
"Guess maybe I'd have thought so, too, if I'd had the chance," responded
the surprising old lady ruefully. "Pretty well mussed up, I guess, and
stunned. Shouldn't wonder if I found a heap o' bruises around me
somewhere--but no bones broke. You see," she added, as though imparting a
great secret, "the Sandersons' bones jest never was made to break. Now,
there was our cousins--the Petersons--they was different. One o' that
family wouldn't dare waggle his finger too hard for fear it would bust on
him. You see, they was just naturally made that way. My son, Willie," here
the brave voice lowered a trifle and tears rose to the bright old eyes,
"he used to call them in fun--always jokin', that boy was--the Break-bone
Petersons."

This is an atom: 
"But are you sure you aren't hurt?" Betty insisted, still with that
curious feeling of having the wind taken out of her sails. "You see," she
added hastily, as the twinkle returned to the old woman's eyes, "we were
going to take you to the hospital, but if you are really sure there are no
bones broken, I think you would like the Hostess House better."

This is an atom: 
"Hostess House?" repeated the old woman, her eyes widening with interest.
"Yes, I've heard a lot about those places. That's where the sweethearts
and mothers and wives of the soldier boys go, isn't it--to meet them--?"

This is an atom: 
"Yes," Betty responded eagerly. "You see, that's what we are doing,
helping to make them feel at home. That's why we want you to come with us
now and stay there until you feel better."

This is an atom: 
"But I'm not a mother, or a wife, or a sweetheart of any of those boys,"
objected the little old woman, while the same cloud swept over her face,
leaving it wrinkled and old. "I--I might have been--if--if--Willie--"

This is an atom: 
"But that doesn't make any difference," Grace assured her, speaking for
the first time and laying a white, soft hand over the knotted, wrinkled
one. "We want you to stay with us and rest while we try to find the man
who ran you down."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, him!" cried the old woman scornfully, all the time patting Grace's
hand with gentle fingers. "There's no use wastin' time lookin' for him.
He'll make pretty sure that he won't be seen round these parts again--not
for some time, anyway. But you're dear, sweet little ladies," she added,
looking from Betty, whose arm still rested about her shoulders to Grace's
hand in hers and from them to the two girls in front. "You're awfully
sweet little ladies," she repeated, while the quick tears rose to her
eyes. "I don't see why you're bein' so kind to me--"

This is an atom: 
"But we just love to do anything we can," broke in Betty quickly, for the
Outdoor Girls never liked to be thanked. "And we'd like so much to have
you see our Hostess House. That is, if you'd care to," she added, suddenly
remembering that the old woman might not be so helpless and alone as she
had seemed--might have made some other plans. But the latter quickly
reassured her.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, I would like to, more than anything else in the world," she replied
eagerly, then, realizing that her fervor might astonish the girls, added
with a little forced laugh. "You see, it's a weakness o' mine. Maybe it's
because I'm getting old--but, the soldier boys--I can't seem to see enough
o' them--"

This is an atom: 
"I don't think it's got anything to do with getting old," Mollie broke in
irrepressibly, "because I feel just that way about it myself. The more I
see, the more I want to see."

This is an atom: 
The woman's eyes twinkled again. She was about to make some sort of
comment, but at that moment Mollie swung the car into the street leading
to the Hostess House, and the girls gave a little surprised exclamation at
finding themselves so nearly there.

This is an atom: 
A few minutes later they were ushering their shabby little guest into the
comfortable alcove off the main reception room and settling her
solicitously in one of the cushion-filled window seats.

This is an atom: 
It was astonishing to see how quickly their patient had recovered from the
accident. She seemed a little weak and unsteady as they helped her from
the car, but going up the steps to the Hostess House she resolutely
refused all assistance and mounted the porch alone.

This is an atom: 
"Isn't she a darling?" Mollie had whispered to Grace as they brought up
the rear. "Did you ever see anybody of her age so full of life and
independence?"

This is an atom: 
And it was that same sturdy independence and humor that endeared her to
the girls in the days that followed and made them willing to do anything
in their power to help her.

This is an atom: 
There was some discussion at first as to where they could put their
unexpected guest, for all the rooms were full and a couple of unused
emergency cots seemed to be all the extra accommodations they could find.

This is an atom: 
"I have it," cried Betty at last, with one of her inspirations. "Grace and
I will give up our room and bunk in with Amy and Mollie. That's where the
two extra cots will come in good."

This is an atom: 
The idea was applauded enthusiastically, and it took only a short time of
scurrying about to put it into action.

This is an atom: 
"But one thing we must remember," Betty cautioned the others, as they
surveyed their work with satisfaction. "We mustn't let our old lady guess
a word of what we've been doing."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, no, we mustn't," agreed Amy in alarm. "She'd be just as apt as
anything to put on her hat and leave us without a word."

This is an atom: 
"You know, it is going to be rather close quarters," sighed Grace, as they
turned to leave the room. "We won't be able to move without falling over
somebody's feet."

This is an atom: 
"You needn't look at mine," Mollie retorted with spirit. "Why is it that
whenever you make a disparaging remark you never fail to look at me?"

This is an atom: 
"That's easy," Grace returned with a twinkle. "All you have to do is to
look in your mirror--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh dear, and I suggested it," mourned Betty, as they descended the stairs
arm in arm. "We'll have to give them the cots, Amy; it would be murderous
to let those two sleep together."

This is an atom: 
"Ah, 'tis a deep, dark plot," cried Mollie, staggering dramatically and
almost falling downstairs. "I see it all--they get the bed while we, poor
wretches that we are, toss our uneasy bones upon the cot--"

This is an atom: 
Amy screamed and Grace covered her ears.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, what do you think this is--a ghost's retreat?" demanded the
latter, while Betty chuckled joyfully. "'Toss our uneasy bones,' indeed!"

This is an atom: 
"Does sound kind of grizzly, doesn't it?" Mollie admitted. "Just the same,
I wager that's what Betty intended."

This is an atom: 
"Mollie, you wrong me!" cried Betty in dismay. "I was simply trying to
avoid a tragedy. But, if you're going to toss bones, anyway, you might as
well do it in comfort; so--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, you goose," cried Mollie affectionately, and in this manner they
entered the den where Mrs. Watson was entertaining, or being entertained
by, the little old woman.

This is an atom: 
The girls immediately took possession of the latter and joyfully escorted
her to the upper floor to look over her new quarters.

This is an atom: 
"My, isn't this fine!" exclaimed the guest, her face lighting up happily.
"A beautiful big bed and three fine windows to see the soldier boys from.
Are you sure," she added, glancing from one to the other of the four eager
faces suspiciously, "that I'm not putting you out? Because, if I am--"

This is an atom: 
"Why of course you're not," Betty fibbed stoutly, adding, with a swift
change of subject: "But I'm sure now that you would like to rest. Look,"
she added, with quick solicitude, as she saw how white the old lady had
become, "your hands are trembling--"

This is an atom: 
"No, no, no," disclaimed the little old woman impatiently, as she gazed
with set face out of the window that faced upon the parade. "I'm a little
cold. And--that boy--" She pointed with quivering finger at a sturdy,
khaki-clad figure, swinging happily over the parade in the direction of
the mess-hall, "He--he reminded me--"

This is an atom: 
"Yes," they cried, crowding about her solicitously, while Betty pushed a
chair toward the window and gently forced her into it.

This is an atom: 
"He--he was--just like--" The slight form was shaking and the words forced
themselves from between her chattering teeth, "what my Willie boy would
have been now--if he hadn't--run away. My little son! My baby!"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER IV

This is an atom: 
MRS. SANDERSON'S STORY

This is an atom: 
Tears were not only in her eyes now, but running down her wrinkled old
face, and the girls, with the tears of real pity in their own eyes,
crowded closer about her.

This is an atom: 
"Would it help," Betty suggested gently, "if you told us about it?"

This is an atom: 
The old lady drew her gaze from the window and let it rest on the sweet,
sympathetic young face, and she nodded slowly.

This is an atom: 
"I guess maybe it would," she agreed, taking a handkerchief from the
pocket in her dress and wiping her eyes. "You see, I never have told
anybody for years and years, and if it hadn't been for this war I suppose
I should have gone right on not telling anybody for the rest of my life.
Of course the Yates and Baldwins and all the folks that lived around us
knew it, so there was no use telling them--" Her voice trailed off and her
eyes sought the window with its vista of parade ground and low, roughly
built barracks buildings.

This is an atom: 
The girls looked at her. Never in their lives, they thought, had they been
so thoroughly interested in anything as they were in the secret sorrow of
this gentle old lady, the sorrow that brought that strange cloud of
unhappiness every time she mentioned this son of hers who had run away.

This is an atom: 
"He must have been a pretty ungrateful sort," thought Mollie resentfully,
"to have run away from a mother who loved him like that."

This is an atom: 
Once more the old lady drew her eyes from the window and fixed them on the
circle of eager young faces.

This is an atom: 
"I suppose young things like you couldn't be expected to understand," she
went on, "and yet perhaps you'll be interested more than other folks,
'count of your having met so many young boys."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, we are interested," they cried in chorus, at which the old woman's
face lighted up and she went on with more cheerfulness.

This is an atom: 
"Well, to begin with," she said, "we lived way at t'other end o' the
world. Danestown, it was called, and my husband--better man never
breathed--died when my little boy was only four years old. I wasn't so
young any more, for Willie was the youngest--the others had all died when
they was babies--and Willie's pa and me was getting along in years when
he come to us--the dearest, sweetest, prettiest baby you ever set your
eyes on.

This is an atom: 
"Well, we had managed to save some little money, though 'twasn't over much
at best, and with me workin' on the farm week days and Sundays, we managed
to get along pretty well. An' I was savin' pennies--" Here the old voice
trembled and nearly broke, so that it was some minutes before the speaker
could go on.

This is an atom: 
The girls tried hard to think of something to say, but as everything that
came to them sounded flat and inappropriate, they kept a sympathetic
silence--which was perhaps the best they could have done, after all.

This is an atom: 
"As I was sayin'," the old voice continued after a while, "I was squeezin'
every little penny I could from the bare necessities to lay aside for the
boy. You see, it had been his father's wish that Willie should be given
the chance neither of us had ever had to get some schoolin' and have his
chance in the world. I was hopin' that by the time the boy grew up I might
maybe have enough to send him to college.

This is an atom: 
"Of course," she added, with an air of apologizing for a weakness that
went straight to the girls' hearts, "they was only dreams. But I don't see
as there was any harm in them, seein's I always kept them to myself an'
never told anybody 'bout them--leastways, no one but Willie.

This is an atom: 
"Sometimes, on a winter night when the snow was fallin' outside an' the
wind was howlin' round the house, I used to draw Willie up to the big,
open fireplace we had in the kitchen and tell him 'bout his pa an' how he
had always wished for Willie to be a fine, big man.

This is an atom: 
"An' Willie, he'd listen with those big, earnest eyes o' his--such
beautiful eyes my Willie had--" Again the voice broke and trailed off into
silence while the girls sat and waited as before, only with a stronger
pity in their hearts for this faithful little old woman who had loved so
well--and lost.

This is an atom: 
"An' then," the voice continued, more softly and dreamily than before, my
little boy would reach up and pat my cheek, just like his father used to
do, and seems like I can hear his voice now, just as plain as I did all
those long, long years ago.

This is an atom: 
"'Maw,' he'd say, drawlin' a little in his cunnin' way, 'just don't you
worry. I'll do all those things, jest like pa said, an' then we'll go an'
live in a big house an' you won't have to work so hard any more--jest be
happy.'

This is an atom: 
"An' then he'd take my hand that was coarse an' rough from workin' in the
field and rub his soft little cheek against it an' look up at me, an'
just smile--"

This is an atom: 
There was a little sob from the spot where Amy was sitting cross-legged on
the floor, while the other girls were frankly and openly crying and not
even noticing it.

This is an atom: 
"He--he must have been a darling!" cried Betty, unsteadily.

This is an atom: 
"He was," answered the old lady simply. "It wasn't very long after that he
ran away, and I suppose"--again her eyes sought the parade ground--"if I
was to meet him now I maybe wouldn't know him. You see, I'd still be
lookin' for my little brown-eyed, yellow-haired Willie boy."

This is an atom: 
"But what made him run away?" asked Mollie, rubbing her eyes furiously
with her handkerchief. "I shouldn't have thought--"

This is an atom: 
"Neither would I," the strange little woman interrupted abruptly. "If he
hadn't had such a high spirit he never would. But--well, seem like I'm
gettin' ahead of my story.

This is an atom: 
"You see, some o' the neighbors' children was a pretty wild lot an' they
always had a grudge against my boy 'cause he wouldn't join them in all
their escapades.

This is an atom: 
"You see, Willie took a lot after his father. He used to just like to sit
and dream and read books you'd thought a little fellow like him couldn't
understand at all--he was just twelve when he ran away.

This is an atom: 
"An' o' course these other boys, they didn't like him 'cause he was
different, an' they was always layin' the blame for all their pranks on
him.

This is an atom: 
"But my Willie, it didn't bother him much. He used to tell me that as long
as he knew he didn't do it and I knew it, what other folks thought wasn't
worth worryin' 'bout--just his pa all over.

This is an atom: 
"Only, I remember one time," the bent old form straightened up proudly and
the bright old eyes gleamed, "when the other boys started pushin' things
too far an' begun callin' my boy names--no names that a boy with any pride
in him would stand for--I heard them--they was jest around the back o' the
house, an' I came to the door with my mad up to the boilin' point, but
what I saw made me stop right short an' wait for what I knew was goin' to
happen.

This is an atom: 
"Willie, he was sittin' on a log by the barn, jest wrapped up in a new
book he'd found, an' it was some time before just what those ragamuffins
was sayin' seeped in. When it did was when I came to the door, boilin'
with rage.

This is an atom: 
"Very quiet, but with a sort o' bulldog set to that chin o' his, just
like his pa, he closed his book an' laid it down beside him.

This is an atom: 
"'I'll be askin' you,' he said, drawlin' very marked and facin' the bully
o' the crowd that was at least two or three years older than he was--'I'll
be askin' you to say what you been sayin' all over again.'

This is an atom: 
"The bully did, with trimmin's, an' Willie listened without turnin' a hair
till he got all through.

This is an atom: 
"'Now,' he says, more quiet than ever--I can see him now, with his big
eyes blazin' black out o' his white face and his little hands that seemed
to me scarce more'n a baby's clenched tight at his side--'Now, I guess, I
got to lick you!'

This is an atom: 
"An' he did!"

This is an atom: 
"He beat him?" cried Mollie excitedly. "Oh, weren't you proud?"

This is an atom: 
"I guess I was!" answered the little old woman, her eyes snapping with the
memory. "That was the day my boy showed what was in him, an' after that
the other boys never called him any more names.

This is an atom: 
"But, o' course," she added, while the old cloud erased the glow from her
face, "that didn't keep the boys from wantin' to get even.

This is an atom: 
"Well, then came the awful day when Abner Conway's barn burned an' Abner
himself came over to accuse my Willie of havin' started the fire,
bringin' with him two or three o' the boys who had tried to call Willie
names to swear they'd seen him do it.

This is an atom: 
"O' course Willie denied it an' I backed him up by sayin'--an' there never
was truer word spoken--that Willie was with me before an' at the time the
barn took fire.

This is an atom: 
"But it didn't do any good. Abner was ragin' because it meant considerable
loss to him, an' so much blame had been laid at Willie's door by the other
boys that he declared this time he was goin' to have him punished.

This is an atom: 
"'I'll have the law on him!' he shouted, rampagin' round my kitchen like a
wild animal. I'll show that boy o' yours if he can go round settin' folks'
barns on fire an' not get come up with! I'll give him a taste o' what it
feels like to be behind bars. It's time somethin' was done, an', by Jerry,
I'm the one to do it!'

This is an atom: 
"An' without another word he slammed out with those grinnin' imps that was
makin' all the trouble followin' at his heels. Well, there isn't very much
more to tell."

This is an atom: 
Here she paused, the animation left her face and she looked pityfully old
and weary. Betty reached over and patted her hand, and finally she resumed
her story.

This is an atom: 
"Abner kept his word and brought the sheriff around that same afternoon,
but they couldn't find Willie--he was gone. He'd left a note for me--full
o' love--but sayin' that he couldn't bear to bring disgrace on me an' so
he'd gone away. When he'd done what his pa wanted him to, he said, he'd
come back an' then we could live in the big house an' be happy.

This is an atom: 
"An' from that day to this, I've never heard a word from my little boy."

This is an atom: 
"Oh," cried Betty, pityingly, "what a terrible thing! I should think he
could have written. But maybe he did, and his letters never reached you."

This is an atom: 
"That old Abner must have been a beast," cried Mollie, clenching her hands
belligerently. "And those boys! Wouldn't I like to put them behind the
bars?"

This is an atom: 
"You see," the old lady went on tonelessly, "it was only a little while
after Willie ran away that they found out that tramps started the fire. Of
course Abner was sorry then, but it was too late. My boy was gone."

This is an atom: 
"But you'll find him yet," cried Betty hopefully, springing to her feet.
"I'm quite sure you will."

This is an atom: 
But the old lady shook her head sadly.

This is an atom: 
"I don't think so, my dear," she said slowly. "If my Willie boy had been
alive I'm sure he would have come to me. He's--he's--almost certain--to
be--dead."

This is an atom: 
The girls tried to comfort the little old woman for a few minutes more,
then had to hurry away to various duties about the Hostess House--Mollie
to help a young Polish boy who had been drafted into the army and who was
struggling valiantly and conscientiously to learn English, Grace to write
a letter for a Southern mountain boy who had never learned to read and
write, and Amy and Betty to help a timid and somewhat helpless mother
through the long hours of waiting before she could have a brief visit with
her son during his time of relief from duty.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER V

This is an atom: 
FUN AND SOLDIERS

This is an atom: 
"I wish we could do something for Mrs. Sanderson," Betty remarked with a
sigh. "I haven't slept a wink for two nights just trying to think out some
way of finding that boy of hers."

This is an atom: 
"He must have been a darling," Grace added thoughtfully. "I can't
understand how a boy like that could run away from home and stay away for
years without even trying to get in touch with his mother."

This is an atom: 
"Maybe that charge changed his character," Mollie suggested dramatically.
"I've heard of such things."

This is an atom: 
"I've read of 'em," sniffed Grace. "But I must say I never believed it.
Give a boy the right sort of character to start with--"

This is an atom: 
"I don't see where you get that," Mollie interrupted hotly. "Why, half the
criminals in the world are made up of boys who were good enough to start
with, but because of some temptation, or their environment, went wrong--"

This is an atom: 
"But Mrs. Sanderson's Willie wasn't a criminal," suggested Amy mildly.

This is an atom: 
"But he was accused of being one and threatened with jail," retorted
Mollie. "And how do you know that wasn't just what he needed to start him
on the downward path--"

This is an atom: 
"Heavens, how melodramatic," drawled Grace. "Here, Mollie dear, have a
candy and try to cheer up."

This is an atom: 
"Then I'd have indigestion and never cheer up," retorted Mollie crossly.
"Sometimes you make me feel as if I were on a little island completely
surrounded by chocolates, Grace, and whenever anything bothered me I'd
only have to eat one--a chocolate, I mean, not the island--to forget all
my troubles."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, bliss," sighed Grace ecstatically. "If you have discovered any such
wonderful island, Mollie darling, lead me to it, and I will spend all the
rest of my life worshipping you."

This is an atom: 
"When you're not too busy gobbling the chocolates," Mollie returned with a
twinkle in her eyes.

This is an atom: 
"Which reminds me," broke in Betty, shaking off the thoughtful mood that
had taken possession of her, "that this is the day of our picnic, and if
we don't get back to the Hostess House pretty soon the boys will be there
before we have even made a sandwich."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness," cried Mollie in consternation, "all this talk about criminals
put the boys entirely out of my head."

This is an atom: 
"I should hope so," twinkled Betty. "Our boys are as little apt to remind
us of criminals as anybody I know. But seriously," she added, a little of
the thoughtfulness returning, "I think we're making a mistake in thinking
that Willie Sanderson has become a criminal. I think there is probably
some satisfactory explanation of why he stayed away from home; and perhaps
with the help of the people we know we may be able to solve the mystery.
Anyway, I don't believe that a boy like that and with a mother like this
dear old soul could turn out very badly."

This is an atom: 
"But suppose he's dead!" Mollie put in.

This is an atom: 
"Well, then our days of detectivities will be over as far as he's
concerned," put in Grace before Betty could reply. "Here, Mollie, take
another chocolate and don't ask foolish questions."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, I think you're going to die, Gracie," said Mollie, looking her
friend over anxiously. "This is the first time since the fateful day of
our meeting that I can remember your offering, actually offering, me two
chocolates in succession."

This is an atom: 
"It isn't the first time you've taken them, though," suggested Grace
dryly. "It just occurred to me that since you will take them anyway, I
might as well get the credit of offering them."

This is an atom: 
"Ah, I guessed it, villainness," cried Mollie darkly. "I have long
suspected that that lovely face hid a soul of venom--I should say, a
venomous soul--"

This is an atom: 
The girls chuckled and Grace answered lightly:

This is an atom: 
"Well, as long as you admit my beauty I don't care what you say about the
rest."

This is an atom: 
"Ah, heartless one--" Mollie was beginning, when with a laugh Betty hooked
an arm through hers and hustled the dramatic one in very undramatic
fashion, up the steps into the Hostess House.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Betty, you are so impulsive," sighed Mollie, as she was finally
permitted a chair in the kitchen. "If you don't stop rushing around so
you'll have me worn to skin and bones--"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, have you got those things, too?" asked Betty, as she hurried
busily from table to pantry and back again. "Please don't be so lazy,
Mollie dear. The boys will be here before we're half ready, and we don't
want to lose a minute of this perfect day."

This is an atom: 
Harder heart than Mollie's must have softened at this appeal, and she set
to work with a will preparing delicacies for this picnic with the
boys--perhaps the thought was accompanied by a strange, panicky sinking
of the heart--the very last picnic they would have together, at least
until after the war.

This is an atom: 
"Did Allen have any more news for you, yesterday?" Mollie asked suddenly,
following up this train of thought.

This is an atom: 
"No, nothing definite," the Little Captain responded, deftly slipping
currant jelly into layers of buttered biscuit. "Of course, he said there
were all sorts of rumors, but since they all came from equally good
sources and no two of them pointed the same way, he wasn't listening to
any of them. All they really know is that the regiment is all ready and
equipped and will surely be on its way very soon."

This is an atom: 
"I'm not even thinking of it," said Mollie, slamming down the cover of the
bread box by way of emphasis, as Amy and Grace came upon the scene. "I
don't dare to let myself think," she repeated.

This is an atom: 
"That's right, dear, I wouldn't either," approved Grace, patting her
encouragingly on the back as she passed on her way to the pantry. "You
want to get your mind used to it by degrees, otherwise the shock might be
too great. What's that, Betty--the sugar? Surely. Anything to be
agreeable!" The last hamper had just been done up, filled to the brim
with good things, when the boys arrived.

This is an atom: 
"Heavens, I'm a fright," cried Grace, viewing herself in the kitchen
mirror--a mirror, by the way, which brought out all a person's bad points
with Puritan honesty.

This is an atom: 
"Go in and keep the boys quiet, Amy, that's a dear," she begged, then,
seeing refusal in Amy's eyes, added cajolingly: "You always look as if you
came out of a bandbox yourself, you know. Please, dear--"

This is an atom: 
But Amy was already half way up the backstairs and paused to make a face
at her.

This is an atom: 
"Taffy!" she cried succinctly.

This is an atom: 
Five minutes later the three girls, in various attitudes of impatience,
were waiting for Grace while she still primped before the mirror.

This is an atom: 
"Just one minute more I give you," stated Mollie, regarding her wrist
watch frowningly.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Mollie, if you only wouldn't talk so much," sighed Grace, turning
with an air of resignation from the mirror. "As soon as you begin to talk
everything goes wrong. My gloves walk under the bed, and my hair stands on
end--"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness," cried Mollie, looking injured, "anybody'd think I was a ghost.
I'll stand for being called lots of things, but a phantom--Ouch! Now
what's the idea?" For Grace's thumb and forefinger had come together in
the fleshy part of her arm.

This is an atom: 
"I was just trying to reassure you," explained Grace innocently, as Mollie
stared indignantly. "There's nothing the least bit ethereal--"

This is an atom: 
But Mollie waited to hear no more, and sped down the stairs after Betty to
bounce unceremoniously in upon the boys.

This is an atom: 
"Beware!" she cried. "A lunatic is about to descend upon us!"

This is an atom: 
"I should say one had already," grinned Allen, at which Mollie
surrendered.

This is an atom: 
"Everybody's against me," she sighed. "When one whom I have always called
my friend, turns agin me--Never mind," she added diplomatically, "I made
the layer cake, Allen Washburn--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Mollie, let me carry your pocketbook," begged Allen in alarm.

This is an atom: 
"How do I know you're honest?" she retorted with a twinkle, and peace was
once more restored.

This is an atom: 
The young folks paired off as usual, and Allen drew Betty a little behind
the others. The two formed so handsome a couple that many a passer-by
stopped and looked back after them with an admiring smile.

This is an atom: 
The camp training had improved Allen wonderfully. Always splendidly
athletic, he carried himself with a poise and moved with a swing that
spoke of perfectly trained muscles, while his handsome face had been
tanned to the color of an Indian's.

This is an atom: 
No wonder that when Allen bent toward her and spoke in a certain tone
reserved for her alone, Betty found it hard to look at this tall, bronzed
soldier who had been her faithful cavalier for--oh, she could not remember
how long.

This is an atom: 
"I haven't seen you for ages," he murmured, and she glanced sideways at
him, dimpling.

This is an atom: 
"Not for twenty-four whole hours," she agreed soberly. "Wasn't it this
time yesterday--"

This is an atom: 
"What has yesterday to do with it?" he interrupted ardently. "I tell you
when a fellow's to be parted from the thing he wants most in the world
every twenty-four hours count--"

This is an atom: 
"Allen!" she cried, turning upon him in swift alarm, "is it settled then?
Have you learned anything definite?"

This is an atom: 
He shook his head, while his laughing eyes said things that made her turn
her own away.

This is an atom: 
"Then why," she asked, with a little pout, "do you have to scare me so?"

This is an atom: 
"Because," he answered happily, "there's nothing I like better than to
see you scared--about that," he added quickly, as she turned an indignant
glance upon him.

This is an atom: 
For a moment it seemed as if anger were there to stay, but it was
impossible to be very angry with Allen--when he looked at one like that.
At least Betty thought so.

This is an atom: 
"You'd better be careful," she said with a soft little laugh. "If you try
that too much, I may not believe you when the real time comes."

This is an atom: 
"Betty," he cried fervently, "I won't ever do it again--I promise you. At
least," he added, straightening up, while in his eyes grew a great
resolve, "not until--that real time comes!

This is an atom: 
"But what have you girls been doing this morning?" he went on, after a
pause.

This is an atom: 
The girl gave an amused but sympathetic laugh before she answered. Then
she said:

This is an atom: 
"Mollie and I have been trying to keep the hearts of three of those
recruits that came in yesterday from breaking outright. Poor boys, they're
awfully young--I believe they fibbed about their ages--and look like
cherubs. None of them has ever been away from home before, and they are
pathetically homesick. But they have told us about their homes and their
mothers and fathers and the little brothers and sisters, and Mollie has
joked with them and--Well, anyway, Allen, I believe we have made them
feel that they are not wholly friendless."

This is an atom: 
"I'm sure you have, Betty dear."

This is an atom: 
"Poor boys," went on Betty. "I presume it will get easier as they get used
to it."

This is an atom: 
"Grace has been writing letters for some of the boys who find it hard to
do that. Grace is awfully good at that. And Amy, I believe, has been
showing some girls who came down to see their brother, about the place and
trying to keep them interested during the long waits between the times
they can see the boy, who, like his sisters, is almost too timid to look
out for himself."

This is an atom: 
Admiration shone in Allen Washburn's eyes as he looked at the Little
Captain and remarked:

This is an atom: 
"What lucky people those Y.W.C.A. officials were to get you girls down
here for this Hostess House! But come, Betty, the others are beckoning to
us."

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER VI

This is an atom: 
PLANNING CAPTURE

This is an atom: 
The spot they had chosen for the picnic was quite a distance away from
Camp Liberty, and by the time the party finally reached it, both boys and
girls were wondering if the generous contents of the hampers would serve
even to take the edge off their appetites.

This is an atom: 
"I don't see why we didn't take your car, Mollie," Grace complained, as
they covered the last stretch of dusty road. "We would have been on the
picnic grounds and had our lunch eaten by this time."

This is an atom: 
"But just think what's in store for us," Betty reminded her cheerily. "We
need a good appetite to eat up all this lunch."

This is an atom: 
"Well, I don't know," Grace grumbled back. "It seems to me I had a good
enough appetite for two lunches, each twice as big as this, when we
started."

This is an atom: 
"Heavens!" cried Frank Haley, who was walking in front with Mollie, "I
see my chances of a square meal dwindling."

This is an atom: 
"I'm beginning to agree with Grace," grinned Roy Anderson, "that we made a
big mistake in not taking the car."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, you're all just lazy," was Mollie's accusation. "We haven't been
walking more than an hour and there's the spot, just around that turn in
the road."

This is an atom: 
"Say," and Will, who had not yet spoken, turned suddenly to Betty, "isn't
this the road where the accident happened that introduced that nice little
old woman--what's her name--"

This is an atom: 
"Mrs. Sanderson," Betty supplied.

This is an atom: 
"Yes, that's it. Isn't this about the place where you found her?"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, no," put in Amy. "It was on this road, but we were miles out of
town."

This is an atom: 
"Will, I'd love you all the rest of my life if you'd only find that
motorcyclist and have him punished," said Betty fervently. "It makes me
wild when I think how easily he got away from us--"

This is an atom: 
"Never mind that," interrupted Will, his eyes twinkling. "All I want is to
have you repeat the first part of your speech. What was that about loving
me all the rest of my life?"

This is an atom: 
"Say, what's the idea?" demanded Allen suddenly, having been engrossed in
a little dream all his own. "What kind of rash promises are you asking
Betty to make?"

This is an atom: 
"Well, I would," contended Betty stoutly, adding with a twinkle: "Like a
sister."

This is an atom: 
"Oh," said Will, turning disappointedly away. "If that's all you have to
offer me--"

This is an atom: 
"But I've got lots more than that," Betty assured him quickly. "Why, Will,
if you're real good, I may even give you an extra piece of cake."

This is an atom: 
"Well, now, that's different again," cried Will, his interest rekindling.

This is an atom: 
"Will," remonstrated Grace plaintively, "I'm surprised at you. You are
really getting shockingly material."

This is an atom: 
"Getting!" interjected Frank, with a grin.

This is an atom: 
"Go on, Betty, never mind this vulgar rabble--with apologies to you, sweet
sister," as Grace shot an indignant glance at him. "You were saying that
if I found this motorcyclist you'd give me an extra piece of cake, or
words to that effect. Am I right?"

This is an atom: 
"Perfectly," laughed Betty, then added, seriously: "But, really, I think
something ought to be done."

This is an atom: 
"So do I," Amy backed her up stoutly. "We ought to let those old
motorcyclists know they can't run over poor old ladies whenever they feel
like it--"

This is an atom: 
"Favorite outdoor sports," murmured Roy.

This is an atom: 
"It was the most heartless thing I ever saw," said Mollie, entering into
the discussion with a will. "He never even stopped to find out what damage
had been done. He might have killed her--"

This is an atom: 
"But what wouldst thee, sweet damsel?" asked Will patiently. "We can
hardly go out on the broad highway and hold up every motorcyclist that
comes along--"

This is an atom: 
"Well, I know what you could do," said Grace, with unusual animation. "You
could take one of us along to point out the suspicious characters."

This is an atom: 
"Yes, we got a fine view of him," added Amy eagerly. "He had small eyes
close together--"

This is an atom: 
"Regular villain type," murmured Frank, but Amy refused to be
side-tracked.

This is an atom: 
"And goggles--"

This is an atom: 
"They all have those," interrupted Roy.

This is an atom: 
"And a tiny little mustache that looked as if it had got there by
mistake."

This is an atom: 
"Probably false," suggested Will. "One of the kind you stick on with
molasses--like feathers--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, do be sensible," cried Mollie impatiently. "Of course you can't go
holding him up at the point of a gun, but there ought to be something--"

This is an atom: 
"Give us time, give us time," Allen interrupted. "Wasn't it Antony who had
time and conquered, or something like that--"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, anybody'd know you'd been out of school a long time," drawled
Grace scathingly. "Mark Antony, indeed!"

This is an atom: 
"Well, it was one of those guys, anyway," maintained Allen, with admirable
impartiality. "And you have to admit the sentiment was fine. All we ask is
time--"

This is an atom: 
"And a little grub," supplemented Will hungrily. "It seems to me I
remember somebody saying a couple of hours ago that we were even then
approaching our destination, and we seem to be getting no nearer
rapidly--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, do try to be sensible," cried Mollie, for the second time. "If you
would only have some patience--"

This is an atom: 
"Never heard the word," declared Will with a grin, and Mollie made a face
at him--a very disrespectful face.

This is an atom: 
"Well, but when--" Will was insisting plaintively when Betty interrupted
him with a cry of delight.

This is an atom: 
"Look, people," she said, breaking away from them and running up the
rather steep bank lightly.

This is an atom: 
"This isn't the spot we picked out, but it's twice as pretty. Big rocks
for tables--and everything."

This is an atom: 
"Especially everything," commented Allen, his eyes twinkling.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, boy!" cried Roy ecstatically, setting down the hamper that had been
his share and beginning to examine its contents without further delay.
"Chicken! Ham sandwiches! Biscuits! Jelly--"

This is an atom: 
"Say, get out of that!" cried Frank, snatching the hamper away with a
vigor born of fear. "What kind of manners do you call that?"

This is an atom: 
"They're as good as yours," retorted the outraged Roy hotly. "Besides,
there's another hamper, isn't there?"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, they seem to think they can have a whole basket apiece," cried
Amy Blackford in dismay.

This is an atom: 
"Well, I guess they've got another think coming," said Allen, inelegantly,
placing himself with outstretched arms before the two precious hampers as
though he were guarding a gold mine. "Now let him come who dares. Only
over my dead body--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, what's the use of spoiling our perfectly good party," complained
Grace. "Can't we ever begin to enjoy ourselves but what somebody starts
taking all the joy out of life by talking about killing somebody, or
something--"

This is an atom: 
"Never mind, Gracie," Frank soothed her, nibbling a chicken bone with
great relish. "You'll get over it. It may take time--"

This is an atom: 
"Silence," commanded Mollie, raising a pickle fork threateningly. "Else in
a twinkling I will split thee to the heart--"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, she's got it, too," sighed Grace drawlingly.

This is an atom: 
"What?" asked Mollie briskly, "I'm always interested in my symptoms--"

This is an atom: 
"It isn't a disease, you goose," drawled Grace. "Unless," she added, as a
second thought, "you can call insanity a disease--"

This is an atom: 
"Well, you ought to know," retorted Mollie, as she proceeded to use the
pickle fork to advantage. "What does your doctor say?"

This is an atom: 
"Now who's bringing war into the party, I'd like to know?" asked Will,
helping himself to his ninth biscuit.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, that's just the usual thing," Betty explained, looking
prettier, so Allen thought, than ever before with the background of lacy
green to set off her bright coloring. "If they don't behave like that we
know they're sick or something. Do have another biscuit, Roy. Goodness,"
and she stared round-eyed down into the empty space where the biscuits
had been, "they're every one gone! Who did eat them all?"

This is an atom: 
"Well, you needn't look at me," said Frank in an aggrieved tone. "Will's
the fellow you've got to watch."

This is an atom: 
Will was about to utter some scathing retort when Grace, who had gotten up
to shake the crumbs from her dress and had walked down toward the road,
suddenly called to them. It was such an excited, urgent call that they
left everything and came running.

This is an atom: 
"What--" began Betty.

This is an atom: 
"It was the motorcyclist!" cried Grace, her face flaming. "I couldn't have
been mistaken, because I caught a good view of his face."

This is an atom: 
"But what was he doing back here?" demanded Amy, while the rest stared at
Grace excitedly. "That's only a rutty old wagon road, and--"

This is an atom: 
"Well, he was bumping and bouncing like everything, and when he caught
sight of me he sent his machine ahead so fast I thought surely he'd have a
smash-up."

This is an atom: 
"Wish he had," said gentle Amy, and at the unusually vindictive expression
on her face the others had to laugh.

This is an atom: 
"Well, there's nothing more we can do now," said Frank practically. "Let's
go back and finish our lunch. Probably," he added, as they thoughtfully
retraced their steps, "he took the wagon road for fear of running into one
of you girls."

This is an atom: 
"Big coward!" cried Betty, with clenched hands. "I wish I had been with
you, Grace, we might have stopped him."

This is an atom: 
The boys shouted.

This is an atom: 
"Such a chance!" crowed Roy, but Betty turned on them with flashing eyes.

This is an atom: 
"Well, we might at least have tried," she cried hotly. "That is more than
you boys would have done. You don't seem to be even interested," she
continued indignantly. "If I were a man in uniform I'd show that coward
that he can't knock old helpless women down and then run away. I'd show
him that in insulting an old woman he was insulting the whole United
States army--"

This is an atom: 
"Hurrah!" cried Will irrepressibly, jumping to his feet. "Now you're
talking, Betty. How about it, fellows? Shall we do as she says?"

This is an atom: 
"You bet we will!" they cried, and at the ring in their voices, even
Betty's ardent little heart was satisfied.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER VII

This is an atom: 
A LARK IN THE OPEN

This is an atom: 
"Well, where do we go from here, boys?" asked Allen, lazily stretching out
on the grass with a convenient, raised bank of moss for a pillow, while
the girls repacked the depleted hampers. "It's such a wonderful day, and
camp was never like this."

This is an atom: 
"Tell us something we don't know," Frank retorted. "Gee, it's been a fine
experience and all, but, believe me, I'll be glad when the call comes for
action."

This is an atom: 
"They're off again," said Grace plaintively.

This is an atom: 
"I must say you're not awfully complimentary," added Mollie, busily
folding napkins.

This is an atom: 
"In what way, sweet maid, do we offend?" Will inquired.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, always talking about how glad you'll be to get away from us," she
explained. "Here we thought we'd been entertaining you so beautifully--"

This is an atom: 
"Gee, you have!" cried Roy, propping himself on his elbow and speaking
with unaccustomed solemnity. "It's been just great, having you girls
here."

This is an atom: 
"It certainly has," added Frank. "I guess we'd have gone clean crazy
because of homesickness if you hadn't come along just when you did."

This is an atom: 
"Now you're saying something," added Allen warmly, while the girls stopped
packing and looked on happily. "Do you remember what we were talking about
that day when we almost--"

This is an atom: 
"Ran into what we were talking about?" finished Frank with a grin. "You
bet I do."

This is an atom: 
"Well, what was it?" drawled Grace, after they had waited patiently for
the boys to continue and the latter had smiled aggravatingly to themselves
over their thoughts.

This is an atom: 
"If it's bad," added Mollie briskly, "we don't want to hear it, for, as
the old lady said that used to come to see Mother regularly once a year,
'I don't care what terrible things people say or think about me, if they
don't tell me about it,' But if it's good--we might stand it."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, it was good all right," Frank assured her, still smiling over his
thoughts. "We were saying that if we didn't get a furlough so we could go
back to Deepdale--"

This is an atom: 
"For a certain purpose," suggested Will.

This is an atom: 
"For a certain purpose," Frank repeated solemnly--"we were afraid we
might have to desert."

This is an atom: 
"Yes, that would have been sensible," scoffed Mollie. "Get half a dozen
years in prison for yourselves and I'd like to know where your furloughs
would be then."

This is an atom: 
"And you haven't really told us a single nice thing about ourselves,"
added Betty plaintively. "All the time we've just been holding our breath
to listen--"

This is an atom: 
"We've been doing our best to tell you those nice things, every minute of
every day since then," said Allen in a low voice. "If you haven't heard,
it's because you wouldn't listen."

This is an atom: 
Betty colored adorably--to quote Allen again--and resumed her packing with
great fervor.

This is an atom: 
"All of which," Frank finished his self-justification, "shows that we're
far from anxious to leave you girls when we say we're eager for action. I
guess," he added, thoughtfully, "it's just because we're so crazy to be
with you that we're eager to go across."

This is an atom: 
"That sounds rather--" began Grace, but Frank would not let her finish.

This is an atom: 
"I know it does," he admitted. "Sounds like a contradiction. But I think
you know what I'm trying to get at, just the same."

This is an atom: 
"Why, sure," Will backed him up eagerly.

This is an atom: 
"Frank means that we've got a confounded, disagreeable job to do before we
can settle down and be happy on good old United States soil again--"

This is an atom: 
"And the sooner we get it done, the better," finished Roy.

This is an atom: 
Allen nodded.

This is an atom: 
"I guess that's about the size of it," he said. "The sooner we get there,
the sooner we'll be coming home again. And, say, fellows, what a home
coming!"

This is an atom: 
At the wistfulness in his voice the girls felt the tears rise to their
eyes, and to save them from a breakdown Betty crisply changed the subject.

This is an atom: 
"I hope you boys can get over to the Hostess House Thursday night to see
the entertainment we are helping get up among those new fellows who came
week before last," she cried.

This is an atom: 
"Working yourselves to death over it, are you?" inquired Allen.

This is an atom: 
"Never!" returned Grace, with sudden emphasis.

This is an atom: 
"But it's lots of fun," chuckled Mollie. "We have found out by judicious
inquiry--Amy, here, soon worms out the heart secrets of these boys by her
quiet, sympathetic way--that a number of those boys have parlor tricks of
one sort or another, and--"

This is an atom: 
"That orchestra fellow really is good," interrupted Amy. "Boys, you should
hear him play! He has a guitar hung over his shoulder, a harmonica
strapped to his head, a piano near by to which he makes sudden dashes, and
all the while he dances the most marvelous dance!"

This is an atom: 
For once Amy was aroused to enthusiasm. The boys, however, were less
interested, and Roy wanted to know what the girls themselves had to do in
the coming entertainment.

This is an atom: 
"Oh," laughed Betty, "we are stage managers, scenic artists, stage hands,
costumers, modern mutation of the Greek chorus, stays and props for the
weak and timid, brakes for the overbold--in fact, we are around to do any
work that nobody else wants to do.

This is an atom: 
"But we haven't decided," she reminded them suddenly, "just how we're
going to spend the rest of the afternoon. Of course we can always take a
walk--"

This is an atom: 
"Not after that lunch," declared Allen, striving to sit up, and sinking
down again with a moan, "I'm ten pounds heavier than when I came."

This is an atom: 
"Well, you ought to be ashamed to admit it," retorted Mollie. "I thought
in the army you had to be able to hike fifteen miles without winking."

This is an atom: 
"Sure. But this is our day off," objected Roy. "What do you suppose we get
leave for--just to do what we can do every day of our lives?"

This is an atom: 
"Well, then, for goodness sake, suggest something," cried Mollie
impatiently.

This is an atom: 
"I have an idea," cried Allen, so suddenly that they all started.

This is an atom: 
"Well, you needn't be so proud of it."

This is an atom: 
"Do you remember that pond we came across the day we went prospecting
alone, Frank?" he continued, not noticing the interruption.

This is an atom: 
"Yes," Frank answered, catching the idea and looking interested. "Seems to
me it ought to be somewhere in this neighborhood. Going to catch some
fish?"

This is an atom: 
"Why, of course," put in Roy scornfully. "We're so attractive all we have
to do is to whistle to the little animals to have them squabbling for the
best place on the hook."

This is an atom: 
"My, isn't he the sarcastic boy," grinned Allen. "That little trick might
work with you, Roy, but we're more modest."

This is an atom: 
"Well, have you got any fishing tackle?" queried Roy patiently.

This is an atom: 
"Sure," it was Frank's turn to be sarcastic. "Don't you know that's a part
of every dough boy's outfit--so he can go fishing for the Huns?"

This is an atom: 
"Peace, peace, my children," entreated Betty plaintively. "Can't we ever
talk about anything without getting into an argument?"

This is an atom: 
"But this isn't an argument; it's a suggestion," said Allen. "Though I
expect the scorn and ridicule of an unthinking populace. Perhaps you have
heard of the old-fashioned, but sometimes effective, string and bent pin?"

This is an atom: 
The boys shouted, and Allen bent upon them a pitying glance.

This is an atom: 
"It is even as I expected," he said sorrowfully. "Well, I have done my
best--"

This is an atom: 
"I say old man," Roy interrupted suddenly, proving an unexpected ally,
"I'm for you. Of course we won't get anything, but it will be an
adventure. And gee, some fresh fish would taste good!"

This is an atom: 
So they went to work, eager as children on a lark. The girls managed to
furnish enough pins for the hooks, and when the available string gave out,
the boys made use of stout, withy vines as substitutes.

This is an atom: 
And, strange as it may seem, they actually were successful. The little
stream proved to be full to overflowing with fish, small to be sure, but
still eatable.

This is an atom: 
"Gee, I never saw anything like it!" cried Roy as he excitedly pulled out
one fish after another. "They seem to be eager to be caught. And to think
that we actually scoffed at the idea."

This is an atom: 
"That's what genius always has to bear," put in Allen, resignedly, while
Betty gave him a side-wise glance from under her long lashes.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, don't we hate ourself," she chided softly, as she handed him more
bait. "You really shouldn't, Allen--"

This is an atom: 
"What! Hate myself?" he demanded, letting a fish slip back into the water
in his preoccupation. "I'd just as soon--as long as you don't!"

This is an atom: 
Betty laughed happily. It was so good to be there, unbelievably catching
fish, with Allen beside her saying delightful--and foolish--things.

This is an atom: 
Then she thought of the parting that must inevitably come and her bright
face clouded. Allen saw the shadow and leaned toward her anxiously.

This is an atom: 
"What is it, dear?" he whispered softly. "Have I done anything?"

This is an atom: 
"No," she answered with a little smile, half-whimsical, half-wistful. "You
haven't done anything. It's what you're going to do that hurts."

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER VIII

This is an atom: 
ENTER SERGEANT MULLINS

This is an atom: 
"Mollie, you've been crying."

This is an atom: 
"I have not!" snapped Mollie, turning so the light would not fall on her
face.

This is an atom: 
"Well, what are your eyes and nose all red for then?" asked Amy
reasonably.

This is an atom: 
"Ask them," retorted Mollie. "Probably just did it to make me mad."

This is an atom: 
Several days had gone by, and the entertainment into which the girls had
thrown themselves with so much enthusiasm had been given and pronounced a
great success by the soldiers stationed at Camp Liberty. Since then the
days had been given largely to the routine work of the Hostess
House--afternoon teas, evening coffee served to those who wished it,
writing letters for the boys, entertaining others, looking after wives and
mothers and sisters who were visiting near the camp, suggesting books for
some who seemed to be of uncertain taste. Now, on this day, something
unusual had plainly happened.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, girls, I've got a wonderful plan--something new for the soldier
boys!" cried Betty, breaking in upon her two friends merrily. Then, seeing
that she had interrupted something, paused and looked uncertainly from Amy
to Mollie and back again.

This is an atom: 
"Why, Mollie," she cried anxiously, "what is the matter?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, can't you find something original to say?" snapped Mollie irascibly.
"Seems to me that's all I hear from morning to night. 'Oh, Mollie, what's
the matter--what's the matter, Mollie?' till I could scream."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, please excuse me," said Betty, with a little freezing quality in her
voice. "I thought I might help; but if that's the way you feel about it--"

This is an atom: 
Quick as a flash Mollie had run to her and, repentant, thrown her arms
about the Little Captain's neck.

This is an atom: 
"Please forgive me, Betty," she cried. "I'm perfectly horrid, and I know I
don't deserve a friend like you. But--well, I'm just a beast, that's all,"
she finished lamely.

This is an atom: 
Betty laughed and patted her shoulder comfortingly.

This is an atom: 
"I guess we all are once in a while," she said, adding with a return of
her old cheeriness, "Now, prove your repentance by 'fessing up. It's sure
to make you feel better."

This is an atom: 
"Well, it wasn't anything much," Mollie replied, her face clouding again.
"Only--I had a quarrel with--with--somebody--"

This is an atom: 
"How very explicit," drawled Grace, who had entered the room in time to
hear the last part of the sentence.

This is an atom: 
Mollie stiffened, and Betty sent Grace a warning glance.

This is an atom: 
"Go on, Mollie dear, I'm awfully interested," Betty hurriedly interposed.
"Because, you see," she added ruefully, "I just had a quarrel myself."

This is an atom: 
"You did," cried the three at once, and crowded around her eagerly.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Betty, who with?" asked Amy, too excited to bother about grammar.
Betty quarreled so seldom with anybody that when she did the girls
considered it an event.

This is an atom: 
"I'll tell you about it after Mollie has 'fessed up," evaded Betty,
seeming a trifle sorry for her confidence.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, did Mollie have one, too?" cried Grace delightedly, while Mollie sent
her a hostile glance.

This is an atom: 
"Well, you needn't be so glad about it," she retorted glumly. "Maybe it
wouldn't seem quite so interesting if it were you and Roy."

This is an atom: 
"Well, how do you know it wasn't?"

This is an atom: 
The three girls stared.

This is an atom: 
"What was that you said?" demanded Betty weakly. "I don't think I quite--"

This is an atom: 
"I said," returned Grace calmly, and pronouncing each word with
exaggerated distinctness, "that Roy and I have had a quarrel, which
probably would make yours look like nothing at all."

This is an atom: 
"Grace!" they cried in chorus, "do you mean it?"

This is an atom: 
For answer Grace turned to the mirror and began to arrange her hair.

This is an atom: 
"Ask Roy," she flung at them over her shoulder.

This is an atom: 
Behind her the girls looked at each other dumbly, struggling with a wild
desire to laugh and cry at the same instant.

This is an atom: 
"But how?" Amy was beginning dazedly when once more Betty came to the
rescue.

This is an atom: 
"All this would be funny if it weren't so impossible," she said. "Suppose
we begin at the beginning and tell our experiences, since we're all in the
same boat. It ought to be interesting--if not instructive."

This is an atom: 
Grace turned from the mirror and seated herself expectantly on the arm of
a chair.

This is an atom: 
"Well, who's first?" she demanded.

This is an atom: 
"I am," volunteered Mollie unexpectedly, her eyes glittering. "It was all
so utterly absurd, and it made me so m-mad that I had to c-cry--"

This is an atom: 
"So we see," murmured Grace impatiently, but once more Betty sent her a
warning glance.

This is an atom: 
"And then--" she suggested.

This is an atom: 
"Well, Frank and I were taking a little walk when all of a sudden I
happened to think of the bayonet drill Sergeant Mullins had invited us
to."

This is an atom: 
Betty and Grace started and leaned forward eagerly in their chairs.

This is an atom: 
"Yes?" they breathed.

This is an atom: 
"Well," continued Mollie, her color rising, "I don't know whatever got
into Frank--he never used to be like that. He just sort of froze up and
wouldn't answer my questions or anything until I got so angry I told him
that if he didn't tell me what the matter was I'd say good-by to him right
there and wouldn't ever speak to him again."

This is an atom: 
"Yes?" breathed the girls again.

This is an atom: 
"Then what did he say?" asked Grace.

This is an atom: 
"Why, he just got red in the face," replied Mollie, "and said all right
then, he'd tell me what the matter was. And then he said"--she laughed a
little hysterically--"that he just couldn't stand the thought of my seeing
so much of Sergeant Mullins--think of it--me, who have never said two
words alone to the man in my life!"

This is an atom: 
"Well, I never!" Betty exploded, while the usually placid Grace seemed
hardly able to keep her seat. "That's almost exactly what Allen said!"

This is an atom: 
"And Roy, too!" cried Grace dazedly. "Girls, what does it mean?"

This is an atom: 
"It seems to mean," put in Amy dryly, "that one or all of us are ready for
the insane asylum."

This is an atom: 
"Allen said," Betty contributed, wide-eyed, "that it made him mad to see
the way that Sergeant Mullins hung around the Hostess House all the time.
He made it quite plain that there was no doubt but what I was the main
attraction."

This is an atom: 
"And Roy thinks it's me," said Grace, her own grammar suffering from
excitement. "Goodness! does he think the poor boy is after all of us?"

This is an atom: 
"Thinks he's going to start a harem, maybe," cried Mollie hysterically.
"Oh, dear, isn't it too ridiculous?"

This is an atom: 
"I suppose," said Amy thoughtfully, "it's because Sergeant Mullins is so
awfully good-looking."

This is an atom: 
"And, of course, he does come around a good deal," added Mollie.

This is an atom: 
"I know. But that's because he's so lonesome," put in Betty. "And, of
course, we have all tried to be nice to him. I think it's horrid," she
added, flaring up, "for the boys to act so ridiculously just because he
happens to be good-looking and awfully attractive!"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Betty, Betty," chided Mollie, wiping a tear--this time of
merriment--from her eyes. "If Allen could only hear you now!"

This is an atom: 
"Nonsense!" retorted Betty, almost snappishly. "There are dozens of boys
who come here to tell us their troubles, and I don't see why they have
to--"

This is an atom: 
"Pick on him," finished Grace. "Only you must remember," she added with a
twinkle, "that he is much more attractive than most--"

This is an atom: 
"And he never tells us any troubles either," added Mollie, with a chuckle.
"Maybe the boys think that's suspicious."

This is an atom: 
"Well," said Amy, with a sigh, "I seem to be the only one left out. Nobody
thinks it's worth while to quarrel romantically about me."

This is an atom: 
The girls laughed, and Grace added with a grimace:

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, you needn't feel bad about it. It was just your luck that you
didn't meet Will this morning and tell him the awful news, that's all. I
suppose he'd have acted as silly as the rest of them."

This is an atom: 
"Maybe it's a plant anyway," suggested Mollie dolefully.

This is an atom: 
"A plant?" queried Betty. "What kind--a flower or a T.N.T. factory?"

This is an atom: 
"A plot was what I meant," explained Mollie patiently, while the others
chuckled.

This is an atom: 
"A plot!" repeated Grace, with a return of her drawl. "Heavens, Mollie, if
there is anything in signs you ought to be a great author some day from
the way you're always seeing a plot in everything."

This is an atom: 
"Thank you, I hope so," said Mollie.

This is an atom: 
"Well, for goodness' sake get to the point," urged Grace impatiently,
glancing at the clock. "We'll have to dress pretty soon, to go down to
serve the regular afternoon tea to the soldier boys and their friends."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, it just occurred to me," Mollie explained, "that perhaps the boys had
met some girls in town they liked better than they like us and had gotten
up a conspiracy--to--to--quarrel with us--"

This is an atom: 
"What a brilliant idea!" scoffed Grace. "Especially as the boys have been
following us around like Mary's little lamb, and have scared all the other
boys away."

This is an atom: 
"And without being conceited at all," added Amy, with a chuckle, "the
girls I've seen around the town really aren't calculated to steal their
hearts away."

This is an atom: 
"In that case, haven't we still got Sergeant Mullins?" chuckled Betty.

This is an atom: 
They laughed, and Mollie added, as they started to dress for the
afternoon:

This is an atom: 
"I wonder if the boys really expected that we wouldn't go to this special
bayonet drill to-morrow--especially when we've been longing to see one for
ages--just because Sergeant Mullins invited us?"

This is an atom: 
"I'm sure I don't know," said Betty carelessly. "But it really doesn't
matter since we're going anyway!"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER IX

This is an atom: 
THE BAYONET DRILL

This is an atom: 
It was a beautiful sunshiny day, and the girls felt their spirits soaring
happily as they ran down the steps of the Hostess House and started across
the parade.

This is an atom: 
Also the, what appeared to them, foolish objections of the boys to their
attending the bayonet drill lent spice to the adventure, and they hurried
on gaily over the parade.

This is an atom: 
Sergeant Mullins, who had unwittingly caused all the excitement, was, as
the girls had said, a tall, splendidly built fellow, good looking to an
unusual degree, but very silent and reserved.

This is an atom: 
He had seemed immensely attracted from the first by the girls from the
Hostess House, and had made overtures in a half-shy, half-humorous manner
that the girls themselves had found very attractive.

This is an atom: 
But to them he had been only one of many interesting soldier boys who had
come and gone and whose meetings and partings with dear ones they had
watched with swelling throats and tears in their own eyes.

This is an atom: 
But Sergeant Mullins was an expert with the bayonet and had been attached
to Camp Liberty for the purpose of giving the boys special drills in that
work.

This is an atom: 
He had proved so wonderfully successful that, much to his secret
chagrin--for Sergeant Mullins, like all the rest of our brave boys, had
dreamed of the great things he would do "over there"--the Government had
decided to keep him at Camp Liberty indefinitely.

This is an atom: 
Then, one day, he had invited the girls, in return for the many little
kindnesses they had done him, to attend one of his special, exhibition
drills.

This is an atom: 
They had accepted eagerly, little dreaming of the storm their acceptance
would evoke. And it is very doubtful whether, even if they had known, it
would have made any difference, for they had long desired just this thing
and knew that in years to come they would look back upon it as one of the
biggest experiences in their lives.

This is an atom: 
"What time is it, Amy?" Betty inquired a little anxiously. "I'm afraid we
stopped to talk too long to those women who came out to see their nephew,
and I don't want to be late."

This is an atom: 
"We have just a minute to spare," returned Amy, and they quickened their
pace.

This is an atom: 
"Wouldn't it be fun," said Mollie, her eyes sparkling, "if we could only
meet the boys? I'd just like to pay them back for being so silly!"

This is an atom: 
"Maybe they'll be in the drill," drawled Grace hopefully.

This is an atom: 
"That would be adding insult to injury," Betty chuckled. "Then they never
would forgive us."

This is an atom: 
"I just hate jealous people, anyway," added Grace, diving into her pocket
and bringing forth a luscious bonbon which Mollie eyed covetously. "I
think it's so ridiculous and narrow, don't you?"

This is an atom: 
"I think it's a good deal more ridiculous and narrow," grumbled Mollie,
still hungrily eyeing the rapidly disappearing chocolate, "to keep all the
candies to yourself."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, goodness! Take one," returned Grace, offering a capacious pocket. "I
didn't know you were such a shy and shrinking little violet, Mollie. You
usually are perfectly capable of helping yourself."

This is an atom: 
"Well, not out of your fuzzy old pocket," Mollie retorted ungraciously.
"Why didn't you bring the box along?"

This is an atom: 
Grace eyed her pityingly.

This is an atom: 
"Wouldn't I look nice," she demanded, "lugging a candy box along to a
bayonet drill?"

This is an atom: 
"I think you'd probably be exceedingly popular," Betty broke in, with a
chuckle. "You'd have all the boys around you in earnest."

This is an atom: 
"And then what would Roy say?" teased Amy. "He'd never speak to poor Grace
again."

This is an atom: 
"Poor Grace, indeed!" sniffed the owner of the name scornfully. "I'd just
like to have anybody try to 'poor Grace' me! He'd never do it a second
time."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, don't look so ferocious, Gracie," Mollie soothed her. "Some one
give her another candy--do."

This is an atom: 
"I'm not a cripple," Grace retorted, evidently in a belligerent mood.
"I've always been quite able to help myself."

This is an atom: 
"So we've noticed," murmured Mollie irrepressibly.

This is an atom: 
"Will you two please listen to reason?" queried Betty, in her primmest
tones.

This is an atom: 
"Yes, grandma," replied Mollie soberly--which was so ridiculous that even
Betty dimpled. "What have we done now?"

This is an atom: 
"Nothing. It's what you may do," Betty answered, adding, in an explanatory
tone: "You see, we are just about to enter the sacred precincts of the
drill ground, and it is fitting that we do so with an air of propriety and
sobriety."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, is she insulting us?" cried Mollie, in mock indignation. "I'll
have you know, Miss Nelson, that I, for one, am not intoxicated and, what
is more, never expect to be."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness! that is a relief," sighed Grace, who had been hanging
breathlessly on her words. "I thought you were going to say 'I am not
drunk, but soon shall be,' or words to that effect--"

This is an atom: 
"But will you listen?" cried Betty despairingly. "I've got about as much
chance of saying anything sensible--"

This is an atom: 
"As the man in the moon," finished Grace innocently, then, meeting Betty's
outraged eye, added hastily: "Oh, wasn't that what you were going to say?"

This is an atom: 
"No, it wasn't," Betty was beginning, when Mollie, for the first time in
her life played the part of peacemaker.

This is an atom: 
"Go ahead, honey," she interrupted soothingly. "We're all ears."

This is an atom: 
"Speak for yourself," Grace murmured.

This is an atom: 
But this time Betty would not yield, and insisted upon being heard.

This is an atom: 
"Please listen a minute, girls," she begged. "You know we've got a
reputation, deserved or not, of being respectable--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, what a mistake," interpolated Mollie.

This is an atom: 
"I said it might be a mistake," Betty continued patiently, although her
eyes twinkled. "Anyway, we've got to live up to it--Goodness! just look
at the boys. I guess the whole camp must be in the drill."

This is an atom: 
"Yes, I guess Sergeant Mullins was right when he said it was to be an
exhibition drill," agreed Mollie, all fun temporarily swallowed up in a
very real admiration of the spectacle before them.

This is an atom: 
"It's no wonder that Sergeant Mullins is considered a very important
personage around here," added Amy.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, look!" cried Grace, as they sat down upon a convenient bench.
"They've started. Oh, girls, I'm glad I came!"

This is an atom: 
Mutely the girls echoed the sentiment, and for the next hour they sat
motionless, eyes and attention glued upon the magnificent spectacle of a
thousand men, running, advancing, retreating, attacking, all in obedience
to one great plan.

This is an atom: 
They forgot it was only a sham attack, an imitation battle, an exhibition
drill. For the moment a curtain had been lifted and they were permitted to
see something of the glory, the passion, the horror of democracy's
struggle against the armed autocracy of the world.

This is an atom: 
When it was over they sighed and came back to the present almost with a
shock; so greatly had they been engrossed in the scene.

This is an atom: 
"Well, Sergeant Mullins may not be much of a talker," were Mollie's first
words as they rose to go back, "but he certainly knows how to act!"

This is an atom: 
"It was wonderful!" breathed Betty, her eyes gleaming. "Just think what it
must be to be a man in these times! To be able to fight for one's
country!"

This is an atom: 
"Well, I don't know," said Amy, with a little shudder. "That part of it's
all right. But when it comes to being maimed and crippled for life it
isn't so much fun."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Amy, don't!" cried Grace, clapping her hands to her ears, while Betty
continued spiritedly:

This is an atom: 
"I didn't say it was fun," she cried. "Naturally the boys have to take
into consideration the possibility of all that you said, Amy. But there's
no glory in the world like giving yourself for a great cause--"

This is an atom: 
"Hear, hear!" came a masculine voice in applause, and they turned to find
Allen and Frank close behind them.

This is an atom: 
"Well, what will you have?" asked Mollie, eyeing them hostilely. "We
thought you were lost and gone forever like Clementine--"

This is an atom: 
"And were quite reconciled," finished Betty primly, her eyes twinkling.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, you did, did you?" cried Frank, regarding Mollie's haughtily tip-tilt
little nose with mingled fear and admiration. "Well, I'll have you know,
young lady, that you can't get rid of us as easily as all that. May I be
permitted to walk beside you, mam'selle?"

This is an atom: 
Mollie sighed and permitted the liberty with an air of great resignation.

This is an atom: 
In the meanwhile, Allen was whispering into Betty's almost reluctant
little ear.

This is an atom: 
"Did you really mean what you said about its being glorious to give
yourself for a great cause?" he asked softly.

This is an atom: 
"Why, I--g-guess so," she stammered, taken off her guard. "Why?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, just because," he answered vaguely, watching the elusive little
dimple at the corner of her mouth, "I might want to remind you of it--some
day."

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER X

This is an atom: 
ALARMING SYMPTOMS

This is an atom: 
The girls awoke one morning several days later--days of routine duty at
the Hostess House--with the delightful sensation of something good
impending. Crowded as they were in the one big room for Mrs. Sanderson's
accommodation, they had formed the habit of talking over their prospective
fun before the actual work and hurry and bustle of the day began.

This is an atom: 
So it was this morning, just after the sun had streamed in through the two
big east windows and settled on the tip of Betty's upturned little nose in
a most provocative manner.

This is an atom: 
Sleepily she rubbed a hand across her face, then sneezed.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, she's got the 'flu'!" cried Grace in alarm, as she sat up in
bed, jerking the covers from her now fully aroused bedfellow. "Amy!
Mollie! Get me a gas mask, somebody!"

This is an atom: 
"I think it's poor Betty that needs the gas mask," retorted Mollie dryly.
"I never heard you talk so much this early in the morning since the first
day of our acquaintance, Grace. What happened to wake you up?"

This is an atom: 
Whereupon Betty sneezed again, and Grace jumped about a foot in the bed.

This is an atom: 
"Please take her away, somebody," she wailed plaintively, while Betty
regarded her out of wide and sleep-brilliant eyes. "I heard a doctor say
the other day that at the second sneeze it was time to go to the
hospital."

This is an atom: 
"Well, run along," twinkled Betty, adding, with a speculative look: "If
you'll wait just about two minutes, I think I can give you another one."

This is an atom: 
But Grace waited to hear no more. With a bound she was out of the bed and
half-way across the room.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness!" remarked quiet Amy, with a laugh, "I should think it would be
almost worth while having the 'flu,' Betty, just to see Gracie move like
that."

This is an atom: 
"Well, I don't know about that," said Betty, rubbing the offending little
nose ruefully. "It's easy to talk when it's some one else who's got it.
Nobody seems to have any sympathy for me at all."

This is an atom: 
"We would, dear," cried Mollie, slipping out of her own bed and taking
Grace's place beside Betty on the sun-flooded cot, "only you don't really
look as though you were dying of anything, you know--especially influenza.
Betty dear," she added, with an impulsive little hug, "you do look so
pretty!"

This is an atom: 
"Now she does want a quarter," remarked Grace skeptically, as she took the
place Mollie had vacated. "Don't you believe her, Betty Nelson. It's too
early in the morning to see straight anyway."

This is an atom: 
Betty laughed delightedly.

This is an atom: 
"How very complimentary," she said, with a droll twist to the corner of
her mouth. "Never mind, Mollie, it's worth a quarter just for seeing
crooked!"

This is an atom: 
Mollie hugged her, and even Grace had to laugh.

This is an atom: 
"Which reminds me," continued Betty, apropos of nothing at all, "that we
have a whole holiday which we can spend just exactly as we please."

This is an atom: 
"Yes, where shall we go?" cried Amy eagerly. "I thought maybe we could
take Mollie's car and--and--"

This is an atom: 
Three pairs of curious eyes were focused upon her as she hesitated.

This is an atom: 
"And what?" they queried in chorus.

This is an atom: 
"Well, I thought," continued Amy, a little shy, as she always was when
about to suggest something for another's comfort, "I thought we might
invite Mrs. Sanderson to go along."

This is an atom: 
"Good for you, Amy dear," cried Betty eagerly. "That's just exactly what I
was thinking. The dear old lady seemed so much better yesterday I thought
we might persuade her to share our picnic with us. How about it, Mollie?"

This is an atom: 
"Why, of course," answered the latter heartily, "I'd love to have her--if
she'd come."

This is an atom: 
"If she'd come?" repeated Amy, puzzled. "Why shouldn't she come--that is,
if she's feeling strong enough?"

This is an atom: 
"Well," explained Mollie, with a little smile as she recalled one of the
many unusual conversations she had had with the little old woman, "she
told me the other day that she 'hated them gasoline wagons worse than
poison,'--that the only reason she rode in ours was because she was
unconscious when we put her in and she couldn't help herself. And she
added somebody'd have to run over her again to make her do it a second
time."

This is an atom: 
Betty laughed gayly as she flung back the covers and slipped out of bed.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, I don't wonder you were doubtful," she said. "Maybe she's
changed her mind by this time. Anyway, we can ask her and see."

This is an atom: 
"I think she's the most wonderful old person I ever saw," remarked Amy
thoughtfully, as they dressed hastily. "She must be pretty old, and yet
she says the funniest, wittiest things, and her eyes sparkle and twinkle
like a girl's."

This is an atom: 
"Well, I really think she looks older than she really is," said Grace
slowly and very judicially. "You know working on a farm in the hot sun the
way she did for years, isn't calculated to make a person look younger than
she is."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, and if we could only do something to find him for her!" sighed Amy
for--the girls did not know whether it was the fiftieth or the hundredth
time, they had given up counting.

This is an atom: 
"Well, wishing won't accomplish anything," said Mollie practically, as she
vigorously pulled on a shoe as if it were in some mysterious way
responsible for the unsatisfactory state of affairs. "I think some one
ought to nickname us the 'four Dianas.'"

This is an atom: 
"Well, of course Diana was very beautiful," said Grace, complacently
regarding her own pretty reflection in the mirror. "But if you meant that,
Mollie, of course the description applies to only one of us."

This is an atom: 
"Goose," remarked Mollie. "Of course I wasn't thinking of Diana's beauty.
I was merely thinking of her in the role of a fair huntress."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, now she is insulting us!" cried Betty, turning upon her friend
with a melodramatic frown. "Do you mean to imply that one or all of us are
huntresses?"

This is an atom: 
"Not of men," said Mollie scathingly. "That shows a guilty conscience,
Betty. I'm surprised at you."

This is an atom: 
"O-oh! Squelched!" said Betty meekly. "May I ask," she added very humbly,
"just what you did mean?"

This is an atom: 
"I simply meant," explained Mollie patiently, "that we were after two
men--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh!" cried Amy, turning upon her in horror. "And you just told Betty you
didn't mean that!"

This is an atom: 
"I didn't," cried the badgered Mollie in desperation, then turned away in
disgust. "There's no use trying to tell you anything," she said.

This is an atom: 
"Go ahead, Mollie dear," urged Betty.

This is an atom: 
"I meant," Mollie continued slightly, but only slightly, mollified, "that
we were hunting two men--Mrs. Sanderson's Willie and the motorcyclist who
ran her down. And we haven't any more real chance of finding them than--"

This is an atom: 
"A celluloid dog has chasing an asbestos cat in--" began Grace.

This is an atom: 
"That will do," cried Betty primly, though her eyes danced. "After this,
you will kindly answer when you are spoken to, Miss Ford, and at no other
time."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, is that so?" mocked Grace. "Well, I'll just tell you, Miss Nelson,
that although I am extremely fond of you--mistaken as that may be--I will
take no dictation from you or any one else."

This is an atom: 
"I'll give you more than dictation, if you don't stop maundering,"
threatened Mollie. "A girl has about as much chance of saying anything
sensible--"

This is an atom: 
"Did you ever try?" queried Grace innocently, and Betty and Amy had to
form a human barrier between the two enemies.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, please don't kill her, Mollie," begged the Little Captain, her
eyes twinkling. "Not till after breakfast, anyway. I want to give you a
chance to think it over."

This is an atom: 
"Yes, they're punishing murderers terribly," added Amy. "I heard Major
Adams say--"

This is an atom: 
"All right," Mollie agreed, "I'll let her off until after breakfast, but
for one reason and one only--"

This is an atom: 
"And that?" they queried breathlessly.

This is an atom: 
"I'll be stronger then!" she said.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XI

This is an atom: 
POLITE KIDNAPPERS

This is an atom: 
But it seems that breakfast "hath charms to sooth the savage breast," for
after Mollie had attacked and conquered the appetizing fruit and cereal,
ham and eggs, she seemed to forget all about her dire threat and smiled
amiably at her intended victim across the table.

This is an atom: 
"How long will it take you to get ready, Grace?" she inquired. "Can you do
it while Betty and I go around to the garage and back out the car?"

This is an atom: 
"Let Amy help you with the car this time," Betty objected before Grace
could reply. "I want to ask Mrs. Sanderson to go with us."

This is an atom: 
Mollie clapped her hand over her mouth in a gesture of dismay.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness," she reproached herself, "I almost forgot about her. Yes, go
ahead Betty and do your best to get her. I know it would do her good. But
you had better take Amy with you to help persuade Mrs. Sanderson. Amy and
you together are a pair that will be hard to refuse. There goes Mr.
Bretton now! He's so grateful for what we girls have done for him here--as
though it were anything at all--that he'd do far more than help get the
car ready. I'll get his help, while you and Amy go for Mrs. Sanderson and
Grace gets ready. Now, rush! hurry! fly! off with you!"

This is an atom: 
Mollie ran out of the house and after the young soldier whose help she
sought. Grace went to her room for some last-minute dressing, and Amy and
Betty went upstairs to importune Mrs. Sanderson.

This is an atom: 
"Well, good morning, my dears," said the old woman, delighted at sight of
their bright faces. "I declare, if you don't bring all the sunshine in
with you! It is lovely of you to call on an old woman so early in the
morning."

This is an atom: 
"Well, you see," said Betty, eagerly diving right into the middle of her
subject. "We've come to kidnap you. Please, won't you let us?"

This is an atom: 
"Kidnap me," repeated the old lady, patting the soft cheek with a puzzled
air. "Why, it seems to me sort of unusual to ask a body if you can kidnap
'em."

This is an atom: 
Betty laughed.

This is an atom: 
"Well, I guess maybe it is," she admitted gayly. "But, you see, we can't
very well do it without asking you. Mollie said," she added, taking the
little lady's hand in hers and squeezing it affectionately, "that you
told her the only way we could get you to do it was to make you
unconscious again. And," she finished, with an adorable little coaxing
smile, "we couldn't do that, you know. We're altogether too fond of you."

This is an atom: 
Mrs. Sanderson laughed and pinched her cheek.

This is an atom: 
"Very well, honey," she chuckled. "Now if you'll tell me what it's all
about--"

This is an atom: 
"We want you to go on a picnic with us," broke in Amy.

This is an atom: 
"A picnic!" repeated the old lady, more puzzled than before. "What sort of
picnic?"

This is an atom: 
"An automobile picnic," explained Betty, adding quickly as she saw refusal
in the bright old eyes. "Oh, please don't say 'no' yet. We've got the
whole day off, and we're going to take Mollie's car and go off all by
ourselves and eat our lunch and admire the view and--"

This is an atom: 
"Taste gasoline for a week after," finished the old lady with a little
grimace. Then she added quickly, as she saw the hurt look in Betty's
bright face: "No, I didn't exactly mean that, dear, and I wouldn't say
anything to make you feel bad for worlds, that I wouldn't, only--I jest
can't bring myself to ride in those automobiles. You see," there was an
almost pathetic appeal for understanding in the bright old eyes, "I guess
I'm maybe too old to change my ways, an' I get tired easy--"

This is an atom: 
"I'll tell you what we'll do," Amy intervened with rare tact. "Some day
when we're going for just a little ride around the block we'll ask you
again. Maybe you'll feel more like it then, and you can get used to it by
degrees."

This is an atom: 
"That's awfully nice of you, dearie," said the old woman, looking
gratefully from one bright face to the other. "I suppose you don't know
how much I appreciate all you've done for me," she added, her voice
breaking a little, "'cause I never could tell you if I lived for a hundred
years. But you just sort o' revived my faith in human nature. Since my boy
went away--" The old voice broke down entirely then, and Betty continued
patting her hand soothingly,

This is an atom: 
"But there," she added, in a different tone, wiping her eyes determinedly
and smiling at them, "this ain't no kind of a mornin' for tears, an' I
know my son Willie would be the first one to tell me so.

This is an atom: 
"Thank you jest as much for askin' me, dearies, and maybe some other time
I'll get my courage up to it. But now you jest run along an' enjoy
yourselves.

This is an atom: 
"An' when you come back," she added, taking both of the soft young hands
in her wrinkled one and patting them gently, "you can come up an' tell me
all about it."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, will you let us?" asked Betty eagerly, jumping up and dropping a
kiss, light as thistle-down, upon the old face. "And we'll bring you
flowers, whole bunches of them. Will you promise to be happy while we're
gone?"

This is an atom: 
"Yes, dearie, just happy thinking of your coming back and the flowers,"
she agreed, and the smile remained on her lips even after the door closed
behind them until the sound of their light footsteps and laughter faded
away.

This is an atom: 
Then the brave lips drooped and the gray head went down upon her arms.

This is an atom: 
"They're such lovely little ladies," she murmured to herself. "An' I will
try to be happy. Only--I want my boy, my little son--my baby--"

This is an atom: 
Meanwhile--

This is an atom: 
"Isn't she the dearest thing?" asked Amy of Betty as they went into the
kitchen to gather up the picnic baskets. "I'm getting so fond of her it
will just hurt like everything to have her go away."

This is an atom: 
"Go away? Oh, Amy!" cried the Little Captain in surprise, facing her as
though that possibility had not yet entered her mind.

This is an atom: 
"Why, yes," repeated Amy, astonished at Betty's amazement. "She's almost
well now, and, of course, she's too independent to want to stay here when
she's all right again. Why, Betty, what's the matter?"

This is an atom: 
For Betty had sunk down in one of the kitchen chairs and was regarding her
tragically.

This is an atom: 
"But, Amy, she mustn't go away," she argued weakly, knowing that she
really had no argument at all. "Why, I really can't imagine it! I--I never
thought--"

This is an atom: 
"Well, of course, none of us wants her to," Amy admitted, adding
reasonably: "But I really don't see how we're going to stop her if she
makes up her mind to go. Do you?"

This is an atom: 
Betty picked up one of the hampers and they walked slowly back through the
hall to the front porch.

This is an atom: 
"Why no, not exactly," she said thoughtfully, then added, with a sudden
gleam in her eyes: "Unless--unless--"

This is an atom: 
"Unless what?" queried Amy breathlessly.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, I don't know whether you'd call it an idea or just plain
foolishness," answered Betty, striving to speak carelessly. "I was just
thinking that we might persuade her to stay longer on the plea that we
wanted to bring the motorcyclist to justice and needed her
identification."

This is an atom: 
Amy looked a little disappointed.

This is an atom: 
"Well, I don't know," she said doubtfully. "She said the other day that
she didn't care much about bringing the fellow to justice. She said one
motorcyclist was as bad as another, and the only thing that would give her
satisfaction would be 'to arrest the whole tribe o' them.'"

This is an atom: 
Betty laughed a little at the characteristic remark, but her eyes were
troubled.

This is an atom: 
"Well," she said with a sigh, "I suppose you're right. She is rather hard
to reason with at times. If only I could think of something."

This is an atom: 
The sharp toot of a horn as Mollie grazed the curb with the huge touring
car put an end to the conversation for the time being. Grace was already
on the porch, and as they raced down the steps the girls' spirits rose
happily.

This is an atom: 
After all, it was a perfect summer day, the sun shone brilliantly down
upon them, the wind caressed their faces, and, above all, they were young.

This is an atom: 
It was not till they were several miles out upon the shining road that
Betty once more thought of Mrs. Sanderson.

This is an atom: 
"We might," she said thoughtfully, as though speaking to herself, "tell
her that we were trying to find her son. That might have some effect upon
her."

This is an atom: 
"Upon whom?" asked Mollie, nearly running the car into a tree by the
roadside in an effort to get a glimpse of Betty.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Mollie, do be careful," cried Amy plaintively. "I never come out with
you but what I expect to be killed."

This is an atom: 
"I should think you'd be tired expecting by this time," returned Mollie
practically. "Now will you please repeat that somewhat meaningless jumble
of words, Betty dear? What was it--something about somebody's son having a
good effect upon somebody--"

This is an atom: 
"Well, I hope you feel better, now that you've gotten it out of your
system," drawled Grace. "Now, Betty, go on. I'll keep her quiet with
chocolates till you've had your say."

This is an atom: 
"Go on talking all night, will you, Betty dear?" entreated Mollie,
speaking thickly because of a mouthful of chocolate. "Home was never--"
But here Grace inserted another bonbon so deftly that Mollie choked and
almost precipitated another appalling accident.

This is an atom: 
"For goodness sakes, hurry, Betty!" cried Amy, in dismay. "If you don't,
there won't be anything of us left to listen to you."

This is an atom: 
"Well," said Betty obediently, for she had been so busy with her own
thoughts that half the persiflage and gay bantering had passed above her
head, "I was speaking of Mrs. Sanderson and her son. I thought that if we
told her we were trying to find her Willie, she might consent to stay on
with us a little longer."

This is an atom: 
"But wouldn't that be rather raising false hopes?" objected Grace. "We
haven't very much chance of really making such a promise good, you know."

This is an atom: 
"Well, but if we tried hard enough we might think of something," Betty
insisted. "We might," she added vaguely, "We might--advertise--"

This is an atom: 
"In what?" queried Amy.

This is an atom: 
"The papers, of course," Betty answered impatiently.

This is an atom: 
"Well," said Mollie, chewing down the last bit of chocolate and speaking
thoughtfully, "there may be something in your idea, at that, Betty. I
don't know about the others, but I'm with you, anyway."

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XII

This is an atom: 
WHERE LOVE IS DEAF

This is an atom: 
"Doesn't it seem funny," Amy was saying as she daintily but thoroughly
gnawed a chicken bone, "not to have the boys with us?"

This is an atom: 
"Well I think," returned Mollie, her nose at an independent angle, "that
it's mighty nice--for a change."

This is an atom: 
"Yes," Grace agreed, employing her paper napkin to remedy the damage done
by a vivid spot of jelly on her skirt. "They seem to think they can
dictate to us. Imagine it! To us! Outdoor girls who have never known what
it was to take dictation from any one!"

This is an atom: 
"Except our Daddies," Betty broke in, her eyes twinkling. "I've seen even
you stand at attention, Gracie dear, when Mr. Ford spoke."

This is an atom: 
"Oh well, of course," said Grace, dismissing the interruption with a wave
of her hand. "We've got to obey our parents, till we're twenty-one
anyway."

This is an atom: 
"Then I guess we've got to go on obeying all the rest of our lives," said
Mollie, with a sigh.

This is an atom: 
They looked at her curiously.

This is an atom: 
"For who," she went on to explain reasonably, "in her right senses is
going to admit to being twenty-one?"

This is an atom: 
"To finish what I was saying," Grace continued, while Betty and Amy
chuckled and Mollie looked wide-eyed and innocent: "I, for one, will never
take dictation from any one outside the home folks--especially mere boys
our own age,"

This is an atom: 
"Well, no one asked you to," said Mollie calmly. "I really don't see what
all the speech-making's about," she added.

This is an atom: 
"It was about the boys," said Amy, mumbling over her third piece of
chicken.

This is an atom: 
"And by the way they take it for granted we've got to do what they say,"
finished Grace.

This is an atom: 
"Well," said Betty, plucking a piece of grass and rolling it thoughtfully
between her fingers, "don't you think perhaps they act that way because
they're going 'across' so soon?"

This is an atom: 
"I don't see what that's got to do with it," returned Mollie, puzzled. "I
should think that would make them want to be especially nice to us--leave
a good impression, you know."

This is an atom: 
"Just the same I can't help thinking," Betty persisted, "that that was why
they acted so queerly about Sergeant Mullins. Maybe they think that when
they're several thousand miles away the other boys will have their
chance."

This is an atom: 
"But that's silly," objected Mollie. "As if we wouldn't think a good deal
more of them when they get over there."

This is an atom: 
"Distance lends enchantment?" queried Grace, with lifted eyebrows.

This is an atom: 
"Goose," commented Mollie.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness," cried Grace plaintively, "that's the second time I've been
called a goose in the last five minutes. Pretty soon I'll be a whole flock
of them!"

This is an atom: 
The girls laughed, and Mollie said with aggravating condescension:

This is an atom: 
"It's hard sometimes to tell the truth, Grace dear, but we only do it for
your own good. That's what friendship is for, you know."

This is an atom: 
"Then give me enemies!" cried Grace. "I don't care how many faults I have
if people just won't tell me about them."

This is an atom: 
"Which reminds me of something," said Mollie with a chuckle.

This is an atom: 
"Well, don't tell us about it," said Grace hastily. "I'm trying hard to
love you, Mollie, but I can't stand everything--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, but it's a joke on me this time," Mollie reassured her, and Grace sat
back with a sigh of relief.

This is an atom: 
"It happened while we were at Pine Island," Mollie continued with a
chuckle. "I was sitting in the living room playing the piano--"

This is an atom: 
"Or trying to?" interrupted Grace.

This is an atom: 
"Or trying to," agreed Mollie with perfect good-nature. "You know my
repertoire consists of two pieces, and I was humming one of them as I
played.

This is an atom: 
"Frank and Roy were sitting on the steps of the porch outside and I heard
Frank say to Roy very earnestly:

This is an atom: 
"'Do you know, I think Mollie would have a wonderful voice if she would
only have it cultivated.'"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, I thought--" began Grace, but the Little Captain very hastily
pinched her into silence.

This is an atom: 
"Evidently they thought I couldn't hear them," Mollie continued. "But they
were mistaken, for I heard Roy answer pityingly, 'Say, old man, I've heard
of love being blind before, but here's a case where the poor little god is
deaf.'"

This is an atom: 
"Mollie," cried Amy, shocked, while the others laughed merrily, "what did
Frank say? Did he stand for that?"

This is an atom: 
"Most decidedly not," chuckled Mollie. "The last I saw of them, Frank was
leaping a fence, hanging on to Roy's coat tails. It was awfully funny. I
think I laughed for an hour afterward,"

This is an atom: 
"It was a wonder there was enough of poor Roy left to come home," giggled
Betty. "Frank isn't what you might call gentle, when his temper is
roused."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, I believe I know when that was now!" exclaimed Grace, with sudden
animation. "It must have been that evening when I was baking biscuits and
I looked out of the window and saw Roy. He looked like a tramp, hair all
disheveled and face as red as a beat.

This is an atom: 
"I called to him and asked him if he'd been in a fight or something, and
he just got redder than ever and backed off into the woods.

This is an atom: 
"I concluded he'd gone suddenly and violently insane, and as the aroma of
nearly burned biscuits filled the air I promptly forgot all about him."

This is an atom: 
Mollie chuckled.

This is an atom: 
"There was probably a very good reason for his _backing_ off," she said.
"I shouldn't wonder if after that he kept his meditations to himself."

This is an atom: 
"Yes," said Grace, with gentle malice, "I've long since concluded that
it's better to keep still about personal matters, no matter what you
think."

This is an atom: 
"Well, perhaps you have," said gentle Amy with sudden spirit: "But I must
say I never noticed it."

This is an atom: 
Grace struck a dramatic attitude.

This is an atom: 
"And you too, Amy?" she cried. "Ah, this is too much--"

This is an atom: 
"Yes, it's all right, dear," soothed Betty, hastily rescuing a basket.
"But please don't step on the lunch. These baskets cost four dollars and
ninety-eight cents at a bargain sale."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, how sordid of you, Betty," chuckled Mollie. "As if Grace cared for a
mere little five-dollar bill."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, I don't know whether I do or not," remarked Grace plaintively.
"It's so long since I've seen one I can't tell."

This is an atom: 
"As Allen remarks," laughed Betty, as she gathered up the remains of the
lunch, "'money must think you're dead.'"

This is an atom: 
They laughed at her, and then suddenly Betty changed the subject.

This is an atom: 
"You know, I overheard something the other day," she said, "that's just
made me terribly blue whenever I've let myself think of it."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Betty," gasped Mollie, jumping unerringly to the catastrophe they had
been dreading all these months, "do you mean the boys have got their
orders?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, no, I don't actually know a thing," Betty hastened to assure her,
but there was a brilliant light of excitement in her eyes that did not
reassure the girls.

This is an atom: 
"Then what do you mean?" cried Mollie impatiently. "Oh, Betty dear, I just
haven't realized how awful it will be until this minute. When, those boys
have actually gone, I'll lie down and die, that's all."

This is an atom: 
"Well, for goodness sake, don't tell them that," beseeched Grace. "Then
they will think they can dictate."

This is an atom: 
"Well, let 'em," said Mollie recklessly. "They can, for all I care."

This is an atom: 
"Go on, Betty, do," urged Amy, her hands clasping and unclasping
nervously. "Tell us what it was you heard."

This is an atom: 
"Well, Major Adams was talking with the colonel," Betty complied, her
color bright, "and I just happened to catch a couple of phrases as I
passed.

This is an atom: 
"'In a week!' the major was saying eagerly. 'The boys will be glad of
that, Colonel. I've had all I could do to keep them pacified at all. Once
let them get at the Huns and it will be all over but the shouting.'

This is an atom: 
"'Yes, they're a fine bunch of young fighters,' the colonel answered. And,
oh girls, I wish you could have seen the way he looked, so splendidly
straight and martial and proud. 'I tell you, Major,' he said, 'it's a
great thing to have the leadership of such lads as those. They're the pick
of the nation.'

This is an atom: 
"And then I went on and my heart was beating so hard I had to hold on to
it," Betty finished. "It seemed to me I could almost hear the cannon and
see the boys--our boys--"

This is an atom: 
Her voice trailed off into silence, and for a long time no one spoke. Each
one of these young girls, who, a few short months before, had scarcely
known the meaning of the word war except as they had read about it in
their histories, was striving desperately to visualize the battle
front--the trenches, great guns belching forth a deadly hail of shells,
the roar of cannon, the moans of dying men--

This is an atom: 
And there, perhaps, in the mire and horror of it all--the boys--their
boys--

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XIII

This is an atom: 
THE COPPERHEAD

This is an atom: 
Betty was the first to break the silence.

This is an atom: 
"But, of course," she said, and they started at the sound of her voice--so
far away had their thoughts been wandering, "it may only be one more of
those rumors the boys are always talking about."

This is an atom: 
"I suppose so," said Grace, with a sigh. "Anyway, it won't do any good to
worry about it till the time comes."

This is an atom: 
"Well, I don't know," said Mollie a little irritably. "It's like having a
sword hanging over your head all the time. I'd just as soon have it cut me
in two now and get it over with."

This is an atom: 
"Yes, it is something like cutting the poor dog's tail off an inch at a
time," sighed Amy, and at the comparison and her sober countenance they
had to laugh despite the very real trouble at their hearts.

This is an atom: 
"I wish," said Betty wistfully after a while, "the boys could have gotten
leave to-day. I should like to have just one more picnic with them. We've
had such good times together. And we're going to have lots more," she
added, springing to her feet with a sudden, swift smile. "That's our part
of the business from now on. Just to keep smiling and make up our minds
that they're coming back to us just as they went--only better."

This is an atom: 
"They couldn't be," declared Amy, and once more the other Outdoor Girls
laughed and hugged her.

This is an atom: 
"Anyway, they've got one good backer in you, Amy dear," said Betty fondly.
"You've no idea how fond all the boys are of you. I declare, sometimes I'm
almost jealous."

This is an atom: 
"You," cried Amy incredulously, looking at the flushed face and shining
eyes. "You'll never need to be jealous of anybody in your life Betty
Nelson--and especially of me," she added modestly.

This is an atom: 
Betty laughed and hugged her again.

This is an atom: 
"Girls, it's getting late," she said suddenly, with another of her swift
changes of subject. "I guess perhaps it's time we were starting back. Oh,
I forgot," she added, in consternation, "I, or rather, Amy and I, promised
Mrs. Sanderson we'd gather some flowers for her, and now we've got to do
it, even if it is late--"

This is an atom: 
"Of course we have," agreed Mollie, rising with alacrity. "It wouldn't do
at all to disappoint her."

This is an atom: 
"It must have been a pretty lonely day for her," said Amy thoughtfully, as
she snapped the lid of a basket shut. "I wish she had come with us."

This is an atom: 
"Well, we're pretty much in the same boat as she is--or will be soon,"
mused Mollie, as the girls scattered to make good Betty's promise.

This is an atom: 
"How so?" queried Amy.

This is an atom: 
"Why," said Mollie, "she's already lost her boy and now we're about to
lose ours."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, Mollie," cried Grace indignantly, while the others chuckled,
"you make me feel eighty years old. They're not our sons, you know."

This is an atom: 
"Of course you had to tell me that--" Mollie was beginning, when a scream
from Amy and a hurried scramble onto a convenient stump interrupted her.

This is an atom: 
"What is it?" they cried, running to her anxiously.

This is an atom: 
"Look out, look out," Amy cried, bringing them up with a sharp turn a
couple of feet from her perch.

This is an atom: 
"What is it?" they cried again, looking wildly about them.

This is an atom: 
"A snake," she screamed. "Look out, Grace, it's coming for you! Oh, look
out!"

This is an atom: 
Wide-eyed and open-mouthed, the girls looked where Amy pointed, and saw,
wriggling ominously toward them through the short grass, a large
coppery-headed snake.

This is an atom: 
Grace gave one desperate leap and landed beside Amy on the stump while
Betty and Mollie stepped to one side out of the reptile's path. Then,
almost miraculously--or so Betty thought when she looked back upon it
afterward--her eye fell upon a forked twig lying at her feet.

This is an atom: 
Quick as light she stooped and picked it up, then turned to Mollie, who
was standing backed up against a tree, white-faced, terrified, in a
half-hypnotized condition, staring at the snake.

This is an atom: 
The reptile had coiled itself and lay hissing at them viciously.

This is an atom: 
"I'm going to hold out this stick," whispered Betty feverishly between
lips that scarcely moved, "and when he strikes, pick up that rock at your
feet and let him have it. Ready?"

This is an atom: 
"Y-yes," stammered poor Mollie, terrified, yet game to the last. "Oh,
Betty--"

This is an atom: 
But the sentence was never finished for, with a menacing movement, Betty
had thrust the stick toward the reptile and the latter with a hiss had
struck.

This is an atom: 
Quick as a flash and before the snake had time to coil again, Mollie
picked up the rock and hurled it at his sinister copper head. Her aim was
true, and the long, slithery body, robbed of its deadliness, writhed and
beat furiously at the short stubbly grass.

This is an atom: 
Mollie put her hands before her eyes, shivering, and even Betty leaned
weakly against a tree, faint and sick, now that the crisis had passed.

This is an atom: 
"I--I thought you'd be k-killed," moaned Amy, and though the tears of
excitement and horror were rolling down her cheeks, she would have been
the first to deny it had you told her she was crying. "Oh, B-Betty, you're
w-wonderful!"

This is an atom: 
"No I'm not--I'm just scared stiff," cried Betty hysterically. "Anyway,
M-Mollie did it all."

This is an atom: 
"Well, let's g-get out of here," cried Grace. Later they had time to laugh
at the chattering teeth that made it impossible to say anything without
stammering--but it seemed anything but funny to them then. "Let's g-get
out!"

This is an atom: 
"Second the motion," cried Betty, with a wry little twist to her mouth,
being, as usual, the first to recover her self control. "I can't see any
sense in lingering."

This is an atom: 
A few seconds later they had gathered up their belongings and jumped
thankfully into the road--out of sight of that sinister body still
writhing in the grass.

This is an atom: 
It was not until they had climbed into the car and were whirling over the
smooth road at a rapid rate that they began to feel like themselves again.

This is an atom: 
"I guess that was one of the narrowest escapes we ever had," said Mollie
over her shoulder with a laugh that was still a little unsteady. "I guess
we won't go picnicking in the woods alone again for quite some time."

This is an atom: 
"But I didn't know there were any snakes around here," said Grace
wonderingly, and, it must be admitted, still with a little quaver in her
voice.

This is an atom: 
"There aren't many," Betty explained, "Allen told me that poisonous snakes
of any sort had been so rarely seen around these parts that people thought
the stories of them were made up. He said they always looked suspiciously
at the bearers of the snake tales, shrugged their shoulders, winked, and
asked each other to guess where So-and-So had been the night before."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness," cried Mollie. "I suppose we'll never dare to tell it then.
They'll think we are--"

This is an atom: 
"Slightly inebriated," finished Betty drolly.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, I don't know what that means," objected Mollie, "but it sounds
worse than what I was going to say. Now what's the matter?"

This is an atom: 
This last exclamation was caused by a sudden, grinding noise within the
machine and a jerking stop that jarred them all nearly out of their seats.

This is an atom: 
Mollie looked back over her shoulder with a despairing expression:

This is an atom: 
"Well, this certainly isn't our lucky day," she said, with forced calm.
"First we nearly get eaten up by a snake, and then the car breaks down--"

This is an atom: 
"But, Mollie, what's the matter?" cried Grace impatiently. "We can't stay
here. Can't you see?--there's a storm coming up."

This is an atom: 
"Well I didn't do it," snapped Mollie. "I do think, Grace, you can be the
most unreasonable--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, please don't start anything else," cried Betty, herself a little on
edge with the rather exciting day's events. "Let's get out and see if we
can find what's wrong. We certainly can't do any good by talking about
it."

This is an atom: 
They got out, and Mollie even consented to "get under," but all to no
avail. The machine refused to be placated and stood stubbornly still in
the middle of the road while the storm clouds gathered and the first drops
began to fall.

This is an atom: 
"Well," Mollie decided at last, sitting miserably on the running board,
"I guess we've either got to sit here all night or walk home and trust to
luck the car doesn't get stolen."

This is an atom: 
"Also get soaked through ourselves," Grace was adding disconsolately, when
a familiar sound caught their ears. It was the regular tramp, tramp of
marching men.

This is an atom: 
"Some of the boys from the camp!" cried Mollie, springing up joyfully.
"Maybe they'll help us."

This is an atom: 
As the small squad swung around the turn in the road they were delighted
to see that Sergeant Mullins was in charge. He brought the boys to a sharp
halt at sight of them, and came forward to meet them, saluting gravely.

This is an atom: 
"Are you in trouble?" he asked, with his quiet smile and a glance at the
stalled machine. "May I help?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, would you?" cried Betty, her pretty forehead puckered. "We do want to
get back before the storm breaks."

This is an atom: 
Without a word, the young fellow removed his jacket and examined the
machine carefully. Then, with equal gravity, he wormed his way under the
car.

This is an atom: 
In what seemed to the girls no more than a minute, he reappeared and
smiled at them.

This is an atom: 
"I guess it's all right now," he assured them with another punctilious
salute. "If I might suggest that there's no time to be lost--" with a
significant glance toward the lowering sky. For answer, Mollie threw in
the clutch and the machine purred evenly. Then, with a little impulsive
gesture, she turned to the sergeant.

This is an atom: 
"It's--it's a long way to Camp Liberty," she said, with pretty hesitation.
"Won't you let us show you how grateful we are by letting us take you
there?"

This is an atom: 
"Please do," urged Betty.

This is an atom: 
He considered a moment, then with another of his grave smiles saluted once
more and turned to the boys who stood waiting in the road.

This is an atom: 
"Pile in, fellows!" he said. "We'll just about make it before the storm."

This is an atom: 
Then, while the boys obeyed, scrambling in any way, and Betty and Grace
squeezed themselves into the front seat, Sergeant Mullins leaned over and
said, very quietly:

This is an atom: 
"Thank you."

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XIV

This is an atom: 
THE REINS TIGHTEN

This is an atom: 
"A week!" sighed Betty. "Oh, Mollie dear, a week's such a very little
time!"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, it isn't even that now," Mollie returned, dropping a stitch in
the sweater she was making and not even noticing it--an almost unheard of
procedure. "That is," she added, with a slight little flicker of hope, "if
you're sure you heard the major aright, Betty. Mightn't he have been
speaking of something else?"

This is an atom: 
"Well, I told you what he said," answered Betty, a trifle impatiently, for
she also had dropped a stitch and saw before her the weary process of
ripping out two whole rows of her helmet--and helmets were such mean
things to make, anyway!

This is an atom: 
"When he spoke of a week," she added, ripping vindictively, "and then said
that the boys would be glad the waiting was over, it seems to me there's
just about one conclusion we can come to."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, all right, but you needn't be so cross about it," returned Mollie,
who, being very cross herself, could not make allowance for the malady in
any one else.

This is an atom: 
"Have you seen any of the boys lately?" she asked, after an interval of
deep concentration. "We've been kept so busy here at the Hostess House
lately with these other boys that our boys might as well be dead and
buried for all I've seen of them."

This is an atom: 
"Who's talking about being dead and buried?" demanded a third voice, and
they turned to see Grace in the doorway with the inevitable candy box
under her arm.

This is an atom: 
"Can't you choose a more cheerful subject?" she added, coming in and
seating herself luxuriously in a big chair. "There's enough of that being
done anyway--"

This is an atom: 
"You talk as if getting dead and buried were some sort of new indoor
sport," interrupted Mollie, glad to have this old familiar enemy to spar
with.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, there's no more sport in anything," returned Grace,
disconsolately. "I don't see why any old swell-headed German--"

This is an atom: 
"Grace!" exclaimed Betty, but with twinkling eyes. "What language!"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, I could do lots better than that," returned Grace tranquilly, "if I
weren't in polite society."

This is an atom: 
"You flatter us," murmured Mollie.

This is an atom: 
"I know it," Grace retorted, still calmly. "Anyway, I was remarking that I
didn't see why any swell-headed old German was allowed to take the world
by the ears and turn it upside down--"

This is an atom: 
"Gee, who's allowing him?" cried a masculine voice from the door, and the
girls turned with a chorus of greetings to welcome Roy.

This is an atom: 
"We were just saying we thought you were dead," remarked Mollie somberly,
never lifting her eyes from the sweater as he seated himself beside her.

This is an atom: 
"Sorry to disappoint you," he replied cheerfully. "As Frank remarked
unflatteringly this morning, 'You are far from being a dead one--go and
reform.'"

This is an atom: 
"Was he speaking of me?" demanded Mollie Billette in deadly quiet, but Roy
raised a placating hand.

This is an atom: 
"No, no, of course not," he said hurriedly. "He was speaking of me, poor
worm that I am. But, I say," he added, looking around at the busily flying
needles, "what's the idea of the knitting. We've got more sweaters and
things than we know what to do with now."

This is an atom: 
Mollie lifted her eyes long enough to give him a withering glance.

This is an atom: 
"Do you think you're the only ones we care about?"

This is an atom: 
"I hope so," he responded promptly and daringly.

This is an atom: 
"Do you think maybe we'd better leave, Betty?" inquired Grace with
delicately lifted eyebrows, while Mollie flushed scarlet.

This is an atom: 
"If you do, I'll never speak to you again," cried the latter, in alarm,
adding, to change the subject: "Where are the other boys, Roy? You usually
travel in fours."

This is an atom: 
"Well, as long as you didn't say on all fours, it's all right," responded
Roy in a weak attempt at a joke that focused three pairs of girlish eyes
scornfully upon him.

This is an atom: 
"Roy!" they chorused.

This is an atom: 
"All right, don't shoot," he pleaded. "What was that you asked me,
Mollie?"

This is an atom: 
"I asked you," returned Mollie, with deliberation, "where the other boys
were."

This is an atom: 
"I don't know, and what's more I don't care," replied Roy independently,
leaning back and crossing his long legs with a sigh of content. "We've all
been trying to get leave to come over and see you girls, and so far I'm
the only one who's succeeded. The old boy, that is, the colonel," he
corrected himself, gravely saluting the imaginary officer, "is drawing the
reins pretty tight these days. Looks," he added, striving to keep the
excitement out of his voice, "pretty much like business."

This is an atom: 
"Like business," they repeated in chorus, and were about to follow it up
with a shower of questions when there was the sound of more masculine
voices in the hall and the missing members of the quartette precipitated
themselves upon the assembled company. Roy looked disgusted--the girls
happy.

This is an atom: 
"So you thought you'd have the field all to yourself, did you?" Allen
demanded of the disconsolate Roy. "Well, that's the time you counted your
chickens too soon."

This is an atom: 
Then, turning to Betty, he caught her two hands in his and waltzed her
exuberantly about the room.

This is an atom: 
"Betty, Betty," he cried, his voice keen, his eyes shining with
excitement, "we've got special permission to tell you, because you're in
the service. We're going, little girl! We're on our way to lick the tar
out of those Huns!"

This is an atom: 
"Allen!" Betty's face went suddenly white and she sank down on the arm of
a chair, regarding him with wide, dark eyes. The other three boys with
Mollie and Grace were gathered in the opposite corner of the room,
chattering like magpies.

This is an atom: 
"It's--it's really come?" she demanded, unsteadily. "Oh, Allen, when?"

This is an atom: 
"Day after to-morrow," he replied, his own hands shaking a little as they
closed over hers. "Are you going to congratulate me, Betty?"

This is an atom: 
"A--of course," she answered, smiling at him with a bravery that made him
long to gather her in his arms and comfort her. She looked so little and
plucky and utterly adorable.

This is an atom: 
"Then do it," he said whimsically, putting his hands behind him to keep
them out of temptation.

This is an atom: 
"C-congratulations," she stammered, then her lip trembled and she bit it
to keep it steady. "I know how much you've been wanting it," she
continued, striving for a matter-of-fact tone, "and so, of c-course, I'm
glad for your sake. Only--"

This is an atom: 
"Only?" he prompted, gripping his hands hard to make them behave.

This is an atom: 
"Only," she added, her voice scarcely above a whisper, and glancing up at
him shyly, "I can't very well help missing you, Allen, just at first--"

This is an atom: 
"Betty," he cried, his hands breaking away from their imprisonment and
seeking hers fiercely, "I'm trying so hard to do the right thing,--be
honorable and all that--wait till I come back, you know--but I can't.
It--it isn't human nature. You're too wonderful--too utterly--"

This is an atom: 
"Allen, don't!" she cried breathlessly. "You forget we're not alone."

This is an atom: 
"I--don't--care--" he was beginning headily, but she wrenched her hands
free, and, eluding him, plunged into the excited group at the other end of
the room.

This is an atom: 
"Hello, Betty," Mollie cried, her voice high with excitement. "I guess you
were right after all--only it's five whole days sooner than we expected."

This is an atom: 
"I--I wish they'd stop the old war," sighed Amy, who had come in in time
to share the wonderful news. "I just can't bear the thought of it."

This is an atom: 
"Gee, that would be a nice note," broke in Will boyishly. "After all these
weeks of training, to have the war stop just as we got ready to have a
hand in it!"

This is an atom: 
"We'll be lucky if we don't leave a couple of hands in it," said Roy,
again trying to be witty and again finding himself the battery for a score
of indignant glances.

This is an atom: 
"If you think that's funny," Grace was beginning when Betty, color high,
heart still beating suffocatingly from that brief little battle with
Allen and her own inclination, interceded in his behalf.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, do leave him alone," she cried, patting Roy's scorned shoulder
soothingly. "I, for one, would forgive him for anything he said or did
just now without even being asked."

This is an atom: 
Roy gave her a grateful glance and Allen whispered close in her ear.

This is an atom: 
"You can be kind to every one but the one who loves you, Betty. Is that
it?"

This is an atom: 
His voice was so low that no one but Betty could hear. And Betty felt an
added rush of color sting her cheeks, and turned her eyes away to hide the
confusion, the sudden fright in them.

This is an atom: 
If they had been alone no one knows what might have happened. But, even as
it was, Allen, watching the flaming color and the downcast eyes, felt his
heart leap joyfully and was almost--almost--satisfied.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XV

This is an atom: 
THE FATEFUL DAY

This is an atom: 
The rain that had been pouring down steadily all night stopped about dawn.
Betty raised herself on one elbow to look out the window and was greeted
by a dazzling burst of sunshine, as the glorious disc dispersed the fog
and took possession of the world.

This is an atom: 
"A good omen," she murmured to herself, rubbing the sleepiness from her
eyes. "Perhaps that's how the Huns will melt away before our boys!"

This is an atom: 
"What are you talking to yourself about?" queried Grace, irritably. "A
person has a fine chance to sleep--"

This is an atom: 
"Sleep!" cried Betty, indignantly. "What on earth do you want to sleep
for? Do you know what day this is?"

This is an atom: 
"Friday," Grace answered mechanically, then seeing the point of the
question, sat up in bed, rubbing her eyes.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, I--forgot," she stammered. "They're--they're going away, aren't
they?"

This is an atom: 
"Yes; unless, they've changed their minds since last night," returned
Betty dryly. "Oh, Grace, please don't look so sleepy. You--you annoy me,"
she finished hysterically.

This is an atom: 
"Well, I'm sorry," said Grace, trying comically to appear dignified. "But
it really isn't so strange that I should look the way I feel--"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, if I looked the way I feel, I'd be an awful mess," sighed Amy
from the other bed.

This is an atom: 
"Maybe you do," chuckled Mollie. "Shall I get you a mirror?"

This is an atom: 
"Well, if you'd been awake almost all night," Amy began, but Mollie cut
her short with a bear's hug.

This is an atom: 
"Forgive me, Amy," she said, with unusual humility. "I do know how awful
it is to lie awake nearly all night and just think.

This is an atom: 
"And I shouldn't blame any one the least bit," she finished, "for calling
me a mess, because I know I am. I'm positively afraid to look in the
mirror."

This is an atom: 
"All right, we'll have 'em all draped in black, just for your special
benefit," said Grace dryly. "Mollie, where did you put my stockings?"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, what do you think I am?" retorted Mollie. "Your little French
maid?"

This is an atom: 
"Nothing half so cute," returned Grace ungraciously, while Betty and Amy
exchanged glances which, interpreted, meant: "We'll have our hands full
with these two, to-day, all right."

This is an atom: 
"Anyway, you didn't answer my question," Grace persisted. "I asked you
what you did with my stockings."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, I've got 'em on," replied Mollie sarcastically, smothering a yawn. "I
mislaid my slumber shoes and used them instead."

This is an atom: 
The girls giggled and Grace looked around for an instrument of punishment.
Not finding any, she was forced to resort to sarcasm.

This is an atom: 
"I guess you must have caught that particular form of insanity from Roy,"
she said.

This is an atom: 
"Well, as long as it wasn't the measles--" Mollie was beginning when Amy
broke in with one of those absolutely irrelevant remarks of hers, that
made her different from every one else.

This is an atom: 
"I wonder," she said thoughtfully, "if the boys will fall in love with
those nice little French girls. They say they're awfully attractive."

This is an atom: 
"Amy, what ever put such a thing into your head?" cried Betty, while the
other two stared at her wide-eyed, not knowing whether to laugh or to be
indignant.

This is an atom: 
"Oh--nothing," she answered vaguely. "I was just wondering, that's all."

This is an atom: 
"Well," said Mollie, throwing back the covers preparatory to rising, "I
might suggest that the next time you feel it coming on, you might choose
something more comfortable, that's all. Wondering about such things might
become wearing. What's that?" she asked, as a sharp tap sounded on the
door.

This is an atom: 
"A caller, presumably," Grace remarked, as she slipped on a dressing gown
and approached the door.

This is an atom: 
The early morning caller proved to be, much to their surprise and delight,
no other than Mrs. Sanderson.

This is an atom: 
The old lady's eyes were unusually bright, and there was a flush on her
face.

This is an atom: 
"I haven't been able to sleep all night," she said, her hands fluttering
nervously in her lap. "Ever since Betty told me the boys were going this
morning I couldn't think of anything but just that one thing."

This is an atom: 
"I am sorry I told you then until this morning," cried Betty, reproaching
herself. "I didn't know it was going to make you feel bad."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, it wasn't your fault, dear," the old woman hastened to reassure her.
"And it really didn't make me feel bad--not for them, anyway. They're
lucky to be able to fight--even to die--for a country like ours. Only,"
she paused, and some of the light died out of her eyes, "I couldn't help
wishing--"

This is an atom: 
"Yes," they prompted gently.

This is an atom: 
"That my Willie boy could have gone with them," she said, the words so
soft that they had to lean close to her to catch them. "I would have been
so proud of him."

This is an atom: 
The girls were silent, not knowing how to comfort the poor old woman.

This is an atom: 
"Perhaps," said Amy at last, scarcely knowing what she was saying, yet
trying so hard to comfort, "he is a soldier somewhere. There are so many
thousands of them, you know."

This is an atom: 
Mrs. Sanderson turned to her with such fierce emotion in her eyes that the
girl unconsciously shrank back.

This is an atom: 
"If I thought that," she said, her voice tense, her hands clasped so
tightly in her lap that the knuckles showed white, "I'd be willing, glad,
to die the next minute. If I could just see my boy in uniform--even if I
knew I could never see him again--" her voice trailed off, and once more
the light died out of her eyes.

This is an atom: 
"But, of course, that's impossible," she said wearily. "If my boy had been
alive, he'd have come back to me. But that wasn't why I came in to see you
so early," she added after a moment, straightening up with that
indomitable courage that had won, first, the girls' admiration, then
their love. "I jest wanted to find out when 'twas the boys was startin'."

This is an atom: 
"We're not quite sure. The boys thought some time between nine and ten
o'clock, but they didn't seem to be at all sure about it. The only thing
we really know is that they're going to start early," Betty answered.

This is an atom: 
"Thank you, dear." The old lady rose, and when she started for the door
Mollie ran before her and opened it.

This is an atom: 
When she had gone, the girls sat still, just looking at each other for a
few minutes. Then--

This is an atom: 
"Isn't she wonderful?" breathed Betty. "After all these years she would
give him up gladly for the sake of her country. That's real patriotism."

This is an atom: 
"She deserves to get him back," murmured Mollie, as though speaking to
herself.

This is an atom: 
"Well, that's just the reason she won't," said Grace, irritably struggling
with an unruly lock of hair. "Nobody ever gets what he deserves in this
awful world. What is the matter with my hair this morning? It looks just
exactly as I feel."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, come away from the mirror, Gracie," cried Betty, putting an arm about
her and dragging her, an unwilling victim, out into the hall. "You'll feel
better after you've had your breakfast. And remember," she added
diplomatically, "there's a brand new box of candy in your left-hand
dresser drawer."

This is an atom: 
The ruse worked, and a smile forced its way through Grace's discontent.
Then a sudden thought struck her and the smile flickered and went out
altogether.

This is an atom: 
"It was Roy's parting gift," she said, striving to speak lightly, though
her voice trembled ever so little. "You know, Betty," she said in a rare
burst of confidence, "I never had the slightest idea I could feel so
really b-bad--" her eyes filled and she brushed her hand across them
impatiently.

This is an atom: 
"Am I not a goose?" she asked plaintively, and Betty, trying to laugh,
choked, too, and abandoned the attempt.

This is an atom: 
Then they both smiled, an April sort of uncertain smile and went in to
breakfast.

This is an atom: 
"I guess," remarked Betty whimsically, just as Mollie and Amy ran down the
stairs and into the room, "that we're fast becoming what you said you were
the other day, Gracie--a regular flock of geese!"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XVI

This is an atom: 
SPARRING FOR TIME

This is an atom: 
The roads were muddy from the heavy rain that had fallen over night, but
Mollie demurred when the girls suggested that they walk to the station
rather than go in the automobile.

This is an atom: 
"It may be all very well for you," she declared, "but I certainly don't
feel in any mood for taking a two-mile walk this morning."

This is an atom: 
"Well, my knees do feel kind of weak and wobbly," agreed Amy plaintively.
"But you know how reckless you are, Mollie, and on these wet roads we're
very apt to skid."

This is an atom: 
"Well, but what's one skid more or less in a good cause?" interrupted
Betty merrily. "Besides, I guess we wouldn't have time to walk, anyway,"
she added quickly, as dozens of soldiers began pouring from their
barracks. "We'll never be able to get to the station before the boys
unless we take the car."

This is an atom: 
"Girls, they're really going," wailed Amy, as they quickly got into their
wraps.

This is an atom: 
"Certainly looks like it," said Grace grimly, for once not knowing or
caring whether the becoming little hat was tilted at exactly the right
angle or not. "It makes me feel all queer and--wobbly inside."

This is an atom: 
"Better take some candy along," advised Mollie, with a weak attempt at
raillery as they ran down the porch steps and piled into the car. "You
won't be able to come out of it alive if you're not properly fortified,
Gracie."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, that reminds me," cried Betty, springing from her seat and from the
car at the risk of her neck, for the machine had already begun to move.
"We forgot the chocolate and tobacco for the boys. Wait for me, Mollie."

This is an atom: 
But Mollie, who had already brought the car to a standstill with a jerk
and a grinding of brakes, leapt out after her, and the two flew up the
steps, taking two at a time, and into the house.

This is an atom: 
Left behind, Amy and Grace looked at each other.

This is an atom: 
"I wish I could move like that," sighed the latter. "Those two get things
done while I'm just beginning to think about it."

This is an atom: 
"And here they come back again," marveled Amy.

This is an atom: 
"Yes we have, and it's just about time, too," panted Betty, as they
scrambled into the machine. "The boys are coming from the main gate now,
and we'll have to make things hum if we want to get there before them."

This is an atom: 
"As Frank would remark," agreed Mollie: "'You said it!' This is going to
be the race of a lifetime,"

This is an atom: 
"But Mollie," said Amy, gripping both hands tight in her lap as the car
swerved sharply and executed a magnificent skid on two wheels, "you know
it won't do either the boys or us any good if we get killed on the way. Do
be--"

This is an atom: 
"Amy Blackford," cried Mollie in an ominous tone of voice, "if you say
that word to me again I will run into a tree or something just for spite!"

This is an atom: 
Amy gave a plaintive little moan, and her two hands gripped tighter in her
lap.

This is an atom: 
"All right," she said. "I'm glad I made my will a couple of days ago."

This is an atom: 
Grace turned an interested and speculative eye upon her.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, you did," she remarked, adding in a wheedling tone, "What did you
leave me, dear? You know I always was your best friend."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, I wonder who's my worst then," retorted Amy, with an unexpected
flash of humor.

This is an atom: 
"Oof, that was a bad one, Gracie," Betty laughed, glad of any diversion
to keep the vision of those splendid, marching boys in the background as
long as possible.

This is an atom: 
Unconsciously the girls were sparring for time. They knew that once they
let themselves think, that once they let themselves realize the full
significance, the utter finality of this thing that was about to happen,
it would be hard for them to smile. And they so wanted to smile!

This is an atom: 
They had been so glad, so proud when the boys had volunteered among the
very first. Down in their hearts they had known that that was the only
thing they could have done.

This is an atom: 
And the thought of their going away had seemed so far in the future that,
as yet, it need not worry them. Blinded by their own passionate
patriotism, they had seen all of the glory of war and none of its horror.

This is an atom: 
And now, in order to send the boys away with the thought of bright faces
and encouraging smiles to cheer them on their long, grim journey, the
girls joked and laughed, carefully avoiding the subject that was uppermost
in their minds.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, well, that's all a person can expect in this world," Grace had
answered resignedly, in reply to Amy's thrust. "Just be kind and loving
and thoughtful of other people's comfort, and you're sure to be sat
upon--"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, she doesn't think anything of herself, does she?" Mollie flung
back over her shoulder. "Now see what you made me do!" the exclamation was
fairly jerked from her as the car lurched into a deep rut at the side of
the road, skidded for a minute, seemingly uncertain whether to fling them
out on the bank or continue its way, then bumped up on the road again and
continued its flight.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Mollie, do be--" Amy began, but a sudden grim straightening of
Mollie's back warned her in time and with a gasp she choked back the
forbidden word.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, isn't she well trained?" laughed Betty, as Mollie bent once
more over the wheel.

This is an atom: 
"Who wouldn't be," protested Amy plaintively, "if a cannibal should come
and hang an axe over his head--?"

This is an atom: 
"Is she calling me names?" demanded Mollie ferociously, half turning in
her seat. "If she is, please tell her to say it to my face."

This is an atom: 
"Well, I would if I could," cried poor Amy desperately. "But I'd have to
be an acrobat--or an idiot--"

This is an atom: 
"The last ought to be easy," drawled Grace, then hastily offered her
candy. "I didn't mean it, Amy dear," she retracted humbly. "Really I
didn't."

This is an atom: 
"Don't you believe her," said Betty whimsically. "She only wants to find
out what you left in your will, Amy."

This is an atom: 
"I wouldn't dare tell her now, anyway," returned Amy, with a twinkle.
"Methinks it might very easily become my death warrant."

This is an atom: 
"How so?" queried Mollie with interest--or perhaps it might be said,
Mollie's back expressed interest. For Mollie's back could express, Grace
had once said, "more emotions in a minute than most people's faces could
in a year." And, riding as they so often did, in full view of that
expressive back, the girls had come to interpret its owner's emotions
correctly in nine cases out of ten. So now they were able to detect a very
quickened interest.

This is an atom: 
"Why," Amy explained naively, "it's barely possible that I've left
something to Mollie, too, isn't it?"

This is an atom: 
"Barely," agreed Mollie dryly.

This is an atom: 
"Well," Amy chuckled, "then what would be easier than for Mollie to
precipitate an accident, dash my brains out against some convenient tree,
and then brazenly protest all innocence in the murder."

This is an atom: 
"Nothing," said Mollie, with the same dryness of intonation, "except the
bare possibility of dashing my own brains out in the transaction."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, well, it could be fixed," said Amy with confidence.

This is an atom: 
"Do you really think so?" Mollie's back once more betrayed a lively
interest, and the girls chuckled. "Suppose you tell me about it."

This is an atom: 
"And sign my own death warrant?" returned Amy plaintively. "Goodness, you
must think I'm foolisher than I am."

This is an atom: 
"Impossible," retorted Mollie and once more Amy sighed and folded her
hands resignedly in her lap.

This is an atom: 
"All right," she threatened, "if we only live through this, I'll change my
will, that's all, and leave everything to Betty and Mrs. Sanderson."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, what have I done?" cried Grace in dismay. "Didn't I just offer
you another candy and--and--everything"

This is an atom: 
"I didn't notice the everything," said Amy.

This is an atom: 
"Well, you noticed the candy," retorted Grace with spirit, "and it was the
fattest, juiciest one in the box, too."

This is an atom: 
"Well, give it back, Amy," directed Mollie, and Amy, in the act of
swallowing the fat juicy chocolate, choked on a chuckle.

This is an atom: 
"Too late," she cried. "It is decapitated."

This is an atom: 
"I thought I heard its death rattle," sighed Grace, mournfully adding, as
the girls laughed at her: "Oh, I don't know what's the matter with me
this morning. I never felt so foolish before.

This is an atom: 
"Girls," she said, and suddenly her voice quivered and her eyes filled,
"I've tried so not to think of it, but I can't fight it off much longer.
Will and I have always been such chums, played and worked and
even--quarreled--together--"

This is an atom: 
"Please don't, Gracie," cried Betty, her face flushing and her eyes
growing dark and wide. "It would be so easy just to g-give way, but we're
in the service, too, you know, and we must be at least as b-brave as the
boys."

This is an atom: 
"I--I guess maybe that's impossible," said Mollie, her voice, even her
straight little back betraying emotion. "Nobody could be as b-brave as
they are."

This is an atom: 
"Well, we never know what we can do till we try, do we?" cried Betty, that
indomitable fighting spirit of hers rising to the emergency. "If we say we
can't, of course we can't, but we can do our best, can't we? If the boys
aren't c-crying, why should we?"

This is an atom: 
"That's the way to talk," cried Mollie, straightening defiantly at the
challenge. "We don't have to, and, what's more, we won't!"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XVII

This is an atom: 
TEARS AND PATRIOTISM

This is an atom: 
It was a valiant determination, that one to smile whatever happened; but
somehow, 'way down in their brave hearts, the girls doubted a little. They
would do their best, but, after all, they were only human and there are
times when to smile is the hardest achievement in the world.

This is an atom: 
"We're--we're nearly there," ventured Amy, after a little interval of
silence, during which the girls had been busily gathering all their
resources for the crisis just before them. "Do you suppose we've got in
ahead of the boys?"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, I should hope so," retorted Mollie, with a brief return of her
old spirit. "If this old car couldn't make better time than boys on foot,
I'd give it away to any one who'd take it off my hands."

This is an atom: 
As she spoke the car swung around a sharp curve, and the station that had
appeared so attractive to them several months ago, loomed into view.
To-day they greeted its appearance with as much enthusiasm as they would
the electric chair.

This is an atom: 
A train was coming in, but it was not one for the troops. It was a mixed
train, composed of one passenger car, a baggage and smoker combined, and
several milk cars.

This is an atom: 
"What a country-looking train," was Amy's comment.

This is an atom: 
She addressed Betty, but the Little Captain did not answer, for the reason
that she was staring into the baggage car, the side door to which was wide
open.

This is an atom: 
"See that man!"

This is an atom: 
She pointed to an individual who stood in the baggage car, his hands
holding up a motorcycle.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Betty, is it that man--our motorcyclist--?" began Mollie.

This is an atom: 
"I am sure it is!" cried Grace.

This is an atom: 
The man was looking toward the end of the baggage car, so they got only a
side look at his face. Then the train moved away and was soon out of
sight.

This is an atom: 
"Well, if that's the fellow, he is gone," murmured Amy.

This is an atom: 
"Now, maybe, we'll never have a chance to catch him," added Mollie.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, we'll catch him yet," declared Betty,

This is an atom: 
Under ordinary circumstances the Outdoor Girls would have given the
incident considerable attention. But now their thoughts were of the
soldier boys so soon to leave.

This is an atom: 
"Didn't the boys say they were entraining for Philadelphia?" asked Grace,
trying hard to make her voice sound natural and merely conversational.

This is an atom: 
"Yes, that's where a great many of them go," Betty answered, praying
desperately that she might fight down that flood of tears that every
moment threatened to rise and overwhelm her. "I _won't_ be weak and
f-foolish," she was saying, over and over, to herself. "I won't, I won't,
I won't!"

This is an atom: 
Then the car came to a standstill beside the platform and the girls sat
looking at each other, not quite sure what to do next.

This is an atom: 
"Do you think it would be all right to stay here?" asked Mollie
uncertainly. "Of course we could get out when the boys came."

This is an atom: 
"It's a little conspicuous, don't you think?" suggested Amy mildly.

This is an atom: 
"Yes, it looks as if we had come to see a parade or something," Grace
agreed.

This is an atom: 
There was a great deal of luggage and many boxes piled at one end of the
station and it was upon these that Betty's eyes, roaming in search of some
sheltered spot, finally focused.

This is an atom: 
"We could slip in behind those packing cases and things," she suggested;
"and then we could see without being too much seen ourselves."

This is an atom: 
"Then the boys might not see us," protested Mollie, clenching her teeth
over her trembling lip. "We don't want them to think we weren't here to
say g-good-bye."

This is an atom: 
"Well, they'll see the car, won't they?" Betty argued, a little
impatiently, for even her sweet temper was beginning to give way under the
strain. "They'll know by that that we're here and then if they miss us,
they deserve to--that's all."

This is an atom: 
"Well, I suppose we'll have to take a chance," said Molly, almost crossly,
as she jumped out after Betty. "I only wish it was all over. The waiting
is getting on my nerves."

This is an atom: 
"Well, you don't think you're alone in that, do you?" Grace was beginning
when Betty interrupted with a little hysterical laugh.

This is an atom: 
"I--I don't see how it's going to make us feel very much better to quarrel
about it," she said, adding whimsically: "Come ahead you two--kiss and
make up before the boys come. You know they always said it made them
jealous enough to commit murder when we did it in their presence."

This is an atom: 
They laughed unsteadily, and Mollie threw an affectionate and repentant
arm about the Little Captain's shoulders.

This is an atom: 
"Betty, dear, you make me ashamed of myself," she said impulsively. "As if
you didn't have enough to worry about yourself without my making you more.
I'm a selfish pig, that's all."

This is an atom: 
Just then the sound that they had all been unconsciously listening for
struck heavily upon their ears. The regular tramp, tramp of hundreds,
thousands, of marching feet!

This is an atom: 
"Oh, they're coming, they're coming!" cried Amy, in a sort of suffocated
little moan.

This is an atom: 
"Well, of course they're coming," retorted Mollie, her nerves jumping with
the effort to speak coolly. "We've been almost expecting that they would,
haven't we?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, I know. But it all seemed like a terrible d-dream till now," returned
Amy, looking so like a bewildered child that Betty put a comforting arm
about her and drew her into the little recess beside her.

This is an atom: 
"It isn't a dream, Amy dear," she said, very steadily. "I don't think we
were ever more fully or terribly awake than we are now. Not even that day
when we heard of the sinking of the _Lusitania_, did we realize just what
this war was going to mean to us. It's only by some sacrifice--some
personal sacrifice--" but the brave voice broke and died into silence
while she listened with almost straining intensity to that regular beat of
marching feet, coming nearer, ever nearer--

This is an atom: 
And in the distance came the long, warning whistle of the train--the train
that was going to take them away!

This is an atom: 
"Oh, keep still," cried Mollie, turning with sudden, unreasoning fury
toward the oncoming locomotive with the smudge of smoke in its wake, her
hands clenched passionately and her black eyes smoldering. "We know you're
coming for them--Roy and Allen and Will and Frank and--and--all the
others. But that's no reason why you have to rub it in, is it?"

This is an atom: 
At any other time, the rather unreasoning attack upon the train would have
seemed funny to the girls, and even in their trouble a faint gleam of
humor came to them, but no one laughed, no one even smiled.

This is an atom: 
"I--I wonder," said Grace, nervously patting a stray lock of hair into
place beneath the smart little hat which, under the spell of excitement,
had gotten slightly awry, "if we'll be able to pick our boys out from all
that crowd. Oh, girls," taking a quick little survey over the top of her
own particular packing case, "they're almost here! Swarms, just swarms of
them!"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, that sounds like locusts--or mosquitoes," cried Betty
hysterically, scarcely knowing what she was saying. "Squeeze in tight,
Amy, or you'll get your toes stepped on. Grace, look again. How far away
are they?"

This is an atom: 
"Just around the corner," reported Grace. "Goodness," she cried in sudden
panic, "I almost wish we'd stayed in the automobile. I'd feel s-safer--"

This is an atom: 
"Safer?" cried Mollie scornfully, "I'd like to know what there is to be
afraid of. Oh, there you go again," shaking an impotent little fist as the
great train rumbled into the station with a screaming of brakes and a
shrieking of whistles.

This is an atom: 
And then the flood broke. Down the station platform came hundreds upon
hundreds of khaki-clad figures, talking, gesticulating, faces eagerly
flushed, eyes brilliant as they prophetically looked into the future.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, we'll never be able to pick them out of the crowd," cried Grace
despairingly. "I'm getting cross-eyed as it is. Oh, there's Corporal
Harris! Yes, and there goes James McDonald! Oh, oh--"

This is an atom: 
And indeed there were scores of familiar faces among the boys that were
passing perhaps forever out of their lives. Some saw the girls and saluted
them gaily, but most of them were too intent upon boarding the train
and embarking upon the glorious adventure with as little delay as possible
to look either to the right or the left.

This is an atom: 
Then, just as the girls thought they must have missed "their own
particular four" and were bracing themselves to stand the disappointment,
they saw them!

This is an atom: 
They were together, the four of them, splendid specimens of young manhood
with their cropped heads and service hats and packs slung over their
backs.

This is an atom: 
"Allen," cried Betty impulsively, and he turned as though shot, a deep
flush staining his face.

This is an atom: 
They came over then, those four, to the girls they were leaving
indefinitely--perhaps forever. Their young faces were very grave, their
jaws grim and set, and the girls realized suddenly that these were not the
boys who had so joyously left Deepdale in the service of their country.
These were no longer careless, irresponsible boys, but men with a great
and glorious duty to perform, and their hearts thrilled with a new pride.

This is an atom: 
And while eloquent things were being said, not only with lips, but with
eyes and clasping hands, Allen bent nearer to Betty's little, upturned
face.

This is an atom: 
[Illustration: "IT MAY BE A LONG TIME, BUT--I'M COMING BACK." _The Outdoor
Girls at the Hostess House. page 145_]

This is an atom: 
"It may be a long, long time, little girl," he whispered, gravely,
"but--I'm coming back. And, Betty, I have your picture--that little
snapshot you gave me, the laughing one, you remember?"

This is an atom: 
Betty nodded, smiling bravely while she choked back something deep down in
her throat.

This is an atom: 
"And--" his eyes had grown very wistful, "and--I'm counting on some
letters from you, Betty?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Allen," she cried breathlessly, "I'll write you all the time, dear,
every day--"

This is an atom: 
But he had caught both her hands in his and was drawing her irresistibly
toward him.

This is an atom: 
"'Dear,'" he was repeating dizzily, incredulously. "Did you call me that,
Betty? Did you say 'dear'?"

This is an atom: 
"Y-yes," she nodded, breathless, a little frightened, yet adorably brave.
Why, this was Allen, and he was going away! He might be killed over there!
She might never see him again! "And," she added, looking up into his eyes
with a shy recklessness, "I--I'd say it again, Allen, if you asked me--"

This is an atom: 
With a little cry he drew her to him, and for one unbelievable, breathless
second his lips rested on hers.

This is an atom: 
"Betty, Betty, I love you," he whispered unsteadily. "I'll be dreaming of
you always. Whatever I do 'over there' will be because of you--" The
whistle shrieked a rude warning and his hands tightened on hers. They
were both trembling a little.

This is an atom: 
"Good-bye," he whispered hoarsely. "I--love--you--" then he tore himself
away, swinging up the steps and into the car.

This is an atom: 
The train began to move amid a great storm of cheering and waving of
service hats. Betty saw it all dimly, through a mist of tears. She pressed
her hand against her lips to still their trembling.

This is an atom: 
"Good-bye, dear," she murmured brokenly.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XVIII

This is an atom: 
AFTER THE BOYS LEFT

This is an atom: 
"Well--it's--over," sighed Grace, as they made their way slowly down the
platform to where the machine stood waiting. "I feel as though I'd like to
go home and cry for a week without stopping."

This is an atom: 
"Favorite indoor sport," retorted Mollie, wiping her own eyes impatiently.
"I'm sure the boys would admire us for doing that."

This is an atom: 
"I don't think they'd admire us very much if they could see us now,"
sighed Amy, dabbing a rather red nose with a generous portion of talcum
powder. "Crying is so terribly damaging to my particular style of beauty!
Every time I do it I vow I never will again--"

This is an atom: 
"And then the boys do foolish things like going away to be shot," finished
Mollie, "and--poof, go all our good resolutions."

This is an atom: 
"But you girls are all Helen of Troys compared to me when I cry," said
Grace, her tear-dimmed eyes fixed mournfully on space. "Why, after I've
had a good cry I cover up all the mirrors in the house for a couple of
days afterward."

This is an atom: 
"I guess," sighed Betty, "that just about everybody we know went away on
that train this morning. Oh, girls, I feel as though somebody were dead."

This is an atom: 
"Well, I'd rather be, than look like this," said Grace, eyeing her
somewhat disheveled reflection in the tiny mirror somberly.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, you're not quite as bad as that, Gracie," Betty comforted her,
laughing a little despite the ache at her heart. "A little cold water and
a curling iron will work wonders--"

This is an atom: 
"Betty," cried Grace, pausing in the act of applying still more powder to
the tip of her nose and regarding the Little Captain with a horrified
expression, "why drag the mention of such unromantic things into the
open--"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, nothing could be much more unromantic than straight hair and
red noses," broke in Mollie practically. "It's lucky the boys don't do
this every day--I'd be a wreck in a week!"

This is an atom: 
"Well, at least you'd be wrecked in a good cause," said Betty, half
wistfully, half whimsically.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, you'll make me cry again after I've just powdered my nose,"
cried Grace in alarm, and the foolishness of it made them all laugh.

This is an atom: 
"You're a goose, Gracie," Mollie commented. "But I love you, just the
same. Now," she added, "who's going to take the wheel while I do my duty
with the powder puff? I need both hands you know--"

This is an atom: 
"Heavens, don't let Amy do it," cried Grace, in still greater alarm. "She
doesn't know a thing about it. Mollie, what are you doing?"

This is an atom: 
"You put the powder on then," Mollie suggested, and Amy reached for the
vanity case. "If you can't drive you can at least do that much. Amy!
you're getting it in my eyes. Do be careful!"

This is an atom: 
"Mollie Billette, if you dare use that word again," cried Amy, her eyes
twinkling, "I'll blind you with powder--just for spite!"

This is an atom: 
The girls chuckled, and Mollie, figuratively speaking, threw up her hands.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, all right," she said, meekly yielding up her nose to treatment. "I
surrender. Only, Amy, do be--"

This is an atom: 
Amy raised the puff threateningly, and the badgered one continued hastily:
"I was only going to say--do be a nice little girl."

This is an atom: 
"As if I were not always that!" retorted Amy, dabbing so liberally at the
unfortunate member that Mollie sneezed, bumped over a rock in the road
and nearly dashed the car against that long-threatening tree.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, goodness! I was sure we'd never come out of this alive," cried Grace
miserably. "Isn't it enough to have our hearts broken, without our necks
in the bargain?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, might as well make a good job of it," returned Mollie cheerfully. "I
don't know that I'd mind very much, anyway."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, now I know I'm going to cry!" wailed Grace, wiping a starting tear
with her handkerchief. "Just when we're almost at Camp, too, and apt to
meet somebody any minute--"

This is an atom: 
"Didn't you just hear Betty say," Mollie broke in, with the patient air
one assumes in speaking to little children, "that everybody who is really
worth anything has gone away on that train?"

This is an atom: 
"Well, I guess I didn't altogether mean that," said Betty thoughtfully.
"Of course there is the medical personnel that is stationed here
indefinitely and very much against its will. And, of course," she added,
after a moment's pause, "there is Sergeant Mullins."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness! we did forget all about him, didn't we?" agreed Mollie, as
though surprised at herself. "I don't know how we could have done such a
thing!"

This is an atom: 
"And he's simply desperate at being kept here," added Amy suddenly. "He's
done everything he possibly could to get away, but they say they need him
more here than on the other side, and so, of course, he can't do a thing."

This is an atom: 
"How did you know?" they asked in chorus, growing gleeful as she colored
under their gaze.

This is an atom: 
"Why, he--he told me," she stammered.

This is an atom: 
"Aha! I have you now, woman," cried Mollie, with a deep villain frown.
"Secret meetings on moonlit nights--"

This is an atom: 
"This one happened to be in the broad daylight, in the glare of noon," Amy
retorted. "And if you can find anything secret or romantic about that,
you're welcome to."

This is an atom: 
Mollie stared for a minute, then joined in the laugh.

This is an atom: 
"Strike one," she cried. "But do tell us, Amy clear, about this meeting
with Sergeant Mullins that occurred in the broad light of day. It must
have been interesting--though unforeseen," she added hastily, as Amy
turned a suspicious eye upon her.

This is an atom: 
"Yes, Amy, I humbly beseech you," added Grace.

This is an atom: 
"No, sir, I have been insulted enough," declared Amy stoutly, and nothing
they could say seemed to have any effect upon her decision.

This is an atom: 
"You ask her, Betty," entreated Grace at last, turning to the Little
Captain, who had been very silent and thoughtful during the ride. "She'll
do anything for you, you know."

This is an atom: 
Betty brought back her wandering attention with a start. She had been
thinking of those last words of Allen's, had been seeing again that
exalted look in his eyes, could feel again the trembling of his hands as
he grasped hers in a grip that hurt--hurt gloriously.

This is an atom: 
"Wh-what did you say?" she asked, dimly conscious of having been
addressed. "I--I'm afraid I wasn't listening."

This is an atom: 
"I'm afraid you weren't," returned Grace, throwing a loving arm about her.

This is an atom: 
Then she repeated Amy's confession and her own question, and gradually
there began to dawn in Betty's eyes a real interest.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Amy, do tell us about it," she begged earnestly. "You know he has
always been something of a mystery to us because of his reserve, and we'd
love to know more about him. You know we're really not curious--just truly
interested."

This is an atom: 
"Well," agreed Amy, with a smile, not able to resist Betty--nobody ever
was for long--"of course, I'll tell you all there is to tell--although it
really isn't much. I was hurrying along the parade a day or two ago,
watching the boys drill, when somebody ran plump into me and made me drop
the package I was carrying. I gasped and started to apologize for not
looking where I was going when I saw that it was Sergeant Mullins. Then we
both laughed and he picked up my package and offered to see me safely back
to the Hostess House. Now what are you laughing at, Mollie?"

This is an atom: 
"I was just thinking," Mollie chuckled, "of the desperate need there was
of a brave escort and of all the lions and tigers that were apt to attack
you on the parade--"

This is an atom: 
"Well, you don't have to be silly," Amy retorted hotly, flushing despite
herself, adding, rather lamely: "He said it was so no one else would run
into me."

This is an atom: 
"Worse and worse, and more of it," chortled Mollie, skidding deftly about
a curve. "What an excuse!"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, all right then," Amy was beginning indignantly, when Grace hurriedly
thrust the candy box beneath her nose.

This is an atom: 
"Have one, honey," she said, in a voice of sugar sweetness. "You needn't
pay any attention to Mollie, you know. We're listening."

This is an atom: 
"Well," Amy continued, slightly mollified, "it was then he told me all
about the ambition he had had of being one of the first on the firing line
and how hard it was to train all the boys to go after the Huns and then
not have a chance at them himself."

This is an atom: 
"And, of course, you told him the same old thing about his doing a great
deal more for his country here than he could do on the other side--" began
Mollie.

This is an atom: 
"Well, what else was there to say?" Amy replied, a little sharply. "Of
course, it didn't make him feel any better, and I knew in my heart that it
wouldn't, but anything's better than just staying quiet and acting
foolish."

This is an atom: 
"And natural," murmured Grace.

This is an atom: 
"Anyway, he seemed to understand that I was really sorry for him," Amy
continued, not noticing the interruption. "He said he was sorry he'd
bothered me with his grouchiness, that he wouldn't have felt so bad about
it if it hadn't been for all the boys going away, and he supposed he'd
even get used to that after a while if he tried hard enough.

This is an atom: 
"Just the same, he did look mighty grim as he turned away," she finished,
with a little smile at the memory, "and he said something about not being
surprised if he got mad at the last minute and hitched on the rear
platform, anyway."

This is an atom: 
"It's wonderful how eager they all are," said Betty, her eyes shining and
a little catch in her voice. "I suppose there are slackers, lots of them,
but so far I haven't met a boy who wasn't desperate at being given a 'safe
berth' away from the firing line and danger.

This is an atom: 
"It never seems to enter their minds to be thankful that they don't have
to run the risk of having their arms and legs shot off, or perhaps being
blinded for life.

This is an atom: 
"And it isn't that they don't think of it, either," she went on, her face
flushing with enthusiasm, "or realize what it means. Just the other night
Will was talking to me, Gracie--you know he's always been almost as much
my brother as yours--and he said, 'I tell you what, Betty, it isn't often
I let the grim side of this war business get to me, and it's the same with
the other fellows. Of course we know it's there, but we're willing to take
the bad with the good for the sake of doing what we're pretty darn sure is
the only thing to do. Only,' he added, slowly, 'we're none of us
pretending to say that we enjoy the idea of being maimed or perhaps
crippled for life. There's not one of us but who's praying that if we have
to go, it will be a good swift bullet that will do the business.

This is an atom: 
"'But,' he added, with a smile--and I could have hugged him for that
smile, girls. 'But, of course, as I said before, we're not thinking of
that side of it. It's enough to know that if it comes, we'll know how to
meet it.'"

This is an atom: 
"And th-that's my brother," cried Grace, half tearful, yet radiant with
pride in him. "Those horrible old Huns won't have even half a chance when
he gets at them."

This is an atom: 
"And Frank and Allen and Roy," added Mollie loyally. "You can't leave any
one of our boys out, Gracie. They're all built on the same plan--as far as
bravery is concerned."

This is an atom: 
"Of course, I know that," said Grace, her eyes softening with the picture
of Roy as he had said good-bye--so youthfully gay, yet so strangely
self-reliant.

This is an atom: 
And Mollie's eyes that could flash so wrathfully at times, were also soft
with memory, and Amy, thinking of those last words that were almost, yes,
so very near, a promise, flushed hotly and wondered if after all she
ought--so soon--

This is an atom: 
"It's no wonder that we're proud of them--our boys," said Betty softly.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XIX

This is an atom: 
REAL TRAGEDY

This is an atom: 
A day or two went by during which the girls tried pluckily to go on with
their duties about the Hostess House with bright and smiling faces. It was
hard, though, to keep their thoughts from wandering to the four boys who
were now on their way to face all the realities and all the horrors of the
terrible war, and perhaps it was well that the leaving of so many made
their duties lighter than usual.

This is an atom: 
On their return from the station after seeing the boys entrain they had
found a letter from their friend, Mrs. Barton Ross, of their home town of
Deepdale, head of the Young Women's Christian Association, under whose
auspices the Hostess House at Camp Liberty was run. In this letter Mrs.
Ross had said that she had sent to the girls a box of books for which they
had sent a request--books all of which one boy or another had asked for,
and which the regular Camp library had not been able to supply.

This is an atom: 
The books had now come, Mollie had learned on a visit to the postoffice,
and as it was a heavy package she had got out the car and with the other
girls had run down for it.

This is an atom: 
As the car rolled up to the curb and stopped once more before the Hostess
House, Betty waved her hand to an upper window.

This is an atom: 
"There's Mrs. Sanderson," she explained as they got out of the automobile.
"She looks kind of pathetic sitting up there all alone."

This is an atom: 
"She always looks pathetic to me," sighed Amy, winding an arm about the
Little Captain as they ascended the steps. "But everybody looks sadder and
more forlorn than usual the past few days."

This is an atom: 
"Well, we can't be sad and forlorn any longer," said Betty determinedly.
"We came here to cheer people up, you know, and how we're going to do it
by being doleful ourselves, I don't know. So, in the words of the
vulgar--'here goes.' How's that?"

This is an atom: 
"That" was a rather forced and pitiful little smile, but it brought an
answering one from Amy and another warm hug.

This is an atom: 
"You're just wonderful, Betty!" she said lovingly, "and we'll do just
whatever you say. If you want us to smile, we'll smile, that's all. Of
course, we have tried, but we'll try still harder."

This is an atom: 
Betty hugged back, and they went up the stairs toward the old familiar
room, feeling better and more cheerful for their renewed good resolutions.

This is an atom: 
For a while the girls were busy unpacking the books and putting them in
place. Then Betty announced her intention of calling on Mrs. Sanderson.

This is an atom: 
"I can't bear to think of her in there by the window all alone," she said.
"It has been awfully hard for her to watch all those boys going away,
knowing that her Willie wasn't among them. I might be able to comfort her
a little."

This is an atom: 
"Let me go too," begged Amy, and arm in arm the two girls went on their
little mission of kindness.

This is an atom: 
They knocked on the door, but, receiving no answer, pushed it open and
stepped inside the room. The old lady was sitting in exactly the same
position as when Betty had seen her from the car, almost an hour before.

This is an atom: 
She glanced up, a little startled when they spoke to her, and half rose to
her feet. She looked dazed and very old and drawn. With a little cry of
compassion, Betty ran over to her and gently forced her back into her
chair.

This is an atom: 
"Did we startle you?" she asked anxiously. "We knocked, but you didn't
answer, and we came right in. I'm sorry--"

This is an atom: 
"You needn't be, dearie." The old eyes twinkled and the old hand was very
gentle as it patted Betty's cheek reassuringly. "I'm always glad to see
you and I've told you to come right in any time. I was thinking very hard,
I guess, and that's why I didn't hear you."

This is an atom: 
"Then we may stay a little while?" said Betty, relieved. "But please tell
us if we'll be a bother," she added hastily, as the old woman turned once
more to the window.

This is an atom: 
"No, no, I was hoping you would come," said the latter so eagerly that
Betty knew her impulse had been a correct one. The old woman had wanted
some one--some one who understood--to pour out her heart to.

This is an atom: 
"It was wonderful just to sit here and watch those boys who went, an' I've
been thinkin' of it," she said, after a brief silence. "Only, somethin'
inside o' me, I guess 'twas my heart, kept bleedin' an' cryin' out that my
boy should have been among them--my little brown-eyed Willie who used to
sit out in the sun readin' every minute he could get. I can see him now,
sittin' there, jest as if 'twas yesterday--" Her voice trailed off, and in
a silence eloquent with sympathy the girls waited for her to go on.

This is an atom: 
"But I wanted to tell those boys too," she cried, straightening up with
sudden fire, "that my Willie wasn't only a reader an' as bright as a
dollar,--he could fight, too. He'd have made a soldier to be proud of.

This is an atom: 
"It wouldn't be near so bad," she added, turning to the girls with such a
depth of tragedy in her eyes that their hearts bled for her, "if I could
only be sure o' his bein' dead. It's the heartbreak of not knowin' that's
goin' to kill me in the end!

This is an atom: 
"But there," she said, catching herself up as though ashamed of the
outburst, "seems like I talk to you little ladies more'n I ever talked to
anybody else in all my life. Seems like it's jest been bottled up inside
o' me so long it's jest got to come out.

This is an atom: 
"I wish you'd tell me," she added, looking at them wistfully, "when it
bothers you, an' I'll jest bottle it all up again twice as tight as 'twas
before."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, please," cried Amy, taking one of the work-worn hands and pressing it
earnestly between her own warm ones. "We just feel honored to think that
you trust us enough and like us enough to tell us these things. If you
didn't we'd be miserable!"

This is an atom: 
"Indeed we should," added Betty fervently.

This is an atom: 
Mrs. Sanderson looked from one of the flushed earnest faces to the other,
and her eyes filled slowly with tears.

This is an atom: 
"I never thought," she said tremulously, "that there were girls like you
in the world."

This is an atom: 
Several days later Mrs. Watson, their chaperone, and the head of the
Hostess House, called the girls to her for a consultation, and, wondering
what new thing was in store for them, they responded to the call.

This is an atom: 
The boys had been gone for a week, time enough to get accustomed--a
little--to the feeling of loss that had so oppressed them during the first
few days.

This is an atom: 
And now there were rumors of new soldiers arriving at the camp and of more
than enough work for the girls at the Hostess House to keep their minds
continually occupied.

This is an atom: 
And, in fact, it was to discuss that very situation that Mrs. Watson had
called them to her this morning.

This is an atom: 
"Well, girls," she said when they had seated themselves in characteristic
attitudes about the room, "we've had a little breathing spell now, just
enough time to rest up before the next onslaught."

This is an atom: 
She paused over the word, smiled, and they smiled back at her.

This is an atom: 
"Of course that means," Betty interpreted, "that not only the boys but
hundreds of their relatives and friends are coming to be entertained and
housed and amused."

This is an atom: 
"Exactly," nodded Mrs. Watson. "And, of course, the work that you girls
have done--"

This is an atom: 
"And you," Betty interjected loyally, but Mrs. Watson brushed the
interruption aside with a wave of her hand, though she flushed happily.

This is an atom: 
"Of course I've done my part of it," she agreed modestly. "But equally of
course I couldn't have done it if you girls hadn't stood shoulder to
shoulder with me. And," she added, enthusiastically, "it has been more the
spirit with which you did the work than the actual work itself that has
won such a reputation for our Hostess House here."

This is an atom: 
"'Reputation!'" repeated Mollie wonderingly, then added with an impish
inflection: "Oh, have we one of those things?"

This is an atom: 
"We have," responded Mrs. Watson, with an indulgent smile. "And, whether
deserved or not, modesty would prompt us to say that it is not, of
course--" and the girls laughed amusedly. "Our reputation is unusually
good and unusually widespread. So good, in fact, that the boys are glad
when they find they are to be sent to Camp Liberty."

This is an atom: 
"Yes," Betty nodded thoughtfully, "several boys have told me that, but I
thought they only said it in a spirit of gratitude, or perhaps, as
flattery."

This is an atom: 
"That is modest," said Mrs. Watson with another smile. "But," she added,
leaning forward in her chair and speaking earnestly, "I honestly think
that you girls don't even begin to realize what a wonderful work you have
been doing right here in this little city that sprang up over night. It
isn't a small thing, you know--sending thousands of our boys away cheered
and strengthened, armed to meet the future--better men, just for having
met you.

This is an atom: 
"And the mothers and wives and sweethearts who have been entertained so
royally and permitted to say good-bye to their loved ones under the very
best and cheeriest conditions possible--why, they have spoken to me of you
with tears in their eyes!"

This is an atom: 
There were tears in their own eyes as the girls smiled happily at her.

This is an atom: 
"But it's been such fun," Mollie protested, "just seeing how much you can
make people forget their troubles."

This is an atom: 
"That's it," Mrs. Watson broke in quickly. "That's the spirit that has
made your work here such a wonderful success. You've done it--and whether
you will admit it or not, sometimes we've all been so tired at night we've
ached in every joint and muscle when we've crawled into bed--because you
loved to do it and because it was 'fun' to make people forget their
troubles, if only for a little while, and be happy.

This is an atom: 
"That's the secret, dear girls, and that's why the boys are all eager to
be assigned here. Also, the boys in the permanent garrison will sing your
praises to the few who have not already heard them, and of course we shall
have to live up to their opinion of us."

This is an atom: 
"Well, if just doing what we have been doing gives us such a reputation,"
said Amy soberly, "I guess it won't be hard to live up to it in the
future."

This is an atom: 
"Only," said Mrs. Watson warningly, "the work before us is apt to be very
much more trying and arduous than any we have yet had. The camp is going
to be filled to overflowing, and of course that will mean entertaining
continually for us.

This is an atom: 
"We may even," she added thoughtfully, "have to quarter some of the
relatives and friends outside the camp in private homes, and, of course,
it will be up to us to find those homes."

This is an atom: 
"You mean we are to go canvassing--the way we did that Thanksgiving?"
queried Betty.

This is an atom: 
Mrs. Watson nodded, and Grace groaned.

This is an atom: 
"Well," said the latter, "I don't care. In fact, I rather like the idea if
only my feet will hold out."

This is an atom: 
"They look pretty durable," remarked Mollie gravely.

This is an atom: 
"But you don't know how they feel," retorted Grace, wiggling one foot in
its trim slipper experimentally. "Every time I get a pair of shoes I have
to get a size larger, and you know," argumentatively, "at that rate I'll
be a freak and you'll be able to charge admission for a look at me."

This is an atom: 
"Good," cried Mrs. Watson, laughing with the others. "I knew some one
would be clever enough to think up a new way of making money. Keep it
right up, Grace."

This is an atom: 
"Yes," said Betty drolly, "just think of the good you can do!"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XX

This is an atom: 
THE MOTORCYCLIST AGAIN

This is an atom: 
"What a glorious morning!" cried Betty, raising her face to the brilliant
sunshine. "I feel as if I could walk miles and miles and miles and never
stop."

This is an atom: 
"Well, it's lucky for you that you do," sighed Grace. "Perhaps you'd be
willing to walk a few for me."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, don't give up, Grade dear, before we've even started," cried Betty,
giving a little exuberant skip with the sheer joy of being alive.
"Anyway," she added, with inspiration, "if you get tired you and Mollie
can go back and get the car."

This is an atom: 
"And have to walk miles to get it," Grace objected. "No, Betty, you'll
have to think up something better than that."

This is an atom: 
"I wouldn't waste my time on such a lazy person, Betty," said Mollie, who
was walking briskly ahead with Amy. "I suppose we might have brought the
car," she added, after a minute, "only it seems foolish when you have to
stop at every house you come to."

This is an atom: 
"It not only _seems_ foolish--it _is_ foolish," said Betty cheerily.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, I tell you what," cried Amy, seized with sudden inspiration, while
the girls stared at her expectantly.

This is an atom: 
"Hasten, Amy," cried Mollie, in a mock agony of suspense. "Do not keep us
waiting in this fashion."

This is an atom: 
"Well," said Amy with a twinkle, "let's buy a couple of the worst sounding
horns we can find in town, go back and get Mollie's car--"

This is an atom: 
"Yes?" they queried breathlessly.

This is an atom: 
"And go through the streets tooting the horns until we've collected a
crowd," finished Amy triumphantly.

This is an atom: 
"And when we've got it, what'll we do with it?" queried Mollie reasonably.

This is an atom: 
"Well, I should think you'd guess the rest," remarked Amy. "We could just
tell 'em what we'd come for, that's all, and ask all who were willing to
take a 'guest' to say 'aye.'"

This is an atom: 
"Never mind, dear, there's still hope," remarked Mollie, patting her arm
soothingly. "The doctor said, with absolute rest and quiet, you might get
over it."

This is an atom: 
Betty chuckled. Grace did not, for the reason that her feet were
beginning to hurt and she did not feel in a chuckling mood.

This is an atom: 
"Well, I don't know but what there's something in your idea after all,
Amy," she said, while Amy looked immensely gratified. "I'm in favor of
anything that cuts out walking."

This is an atom: 
"'Cuts out'?" queried Mollie reprovingly.

This is an atom: 
"Yes, cuts out," returned Grace, sticking to her guns. "What do you say,
Betty? Don't you think Amy has the right idea?"

This is an atom: 
"Well," said Betty diplomatically, while her eyes twinkled at the
imaginary spectacle of whirling through the streets of the town, blowing
raucously on horns and making stump speeches from the running board of the
machine, "it would at least have the advantage of being spectacular--"

This is an atom: 
"There, Mollie!" cried Amy, not waiting for her to finish, the light of
triumph in her eyes. "You see it's three to one. Now, what have you got to
say for yourself?"

This is an atom: 
"Nothing," remarked Mollie dryly, "except to suggest that you wait until
Betty gets through. I imagine she hadn't said all she wanted to on the
subject."

This is an atom: 
"Hadn't you, Betty?" queried Amy, a trifle disconcerted and looking back
at Betty over her shoulder.

This is an atom: 
"We-ll," said Betty slowly, "I never say a thing can't be done until it's
tried--"

This is an atom: 
"There!" Grace exclaimed, but Betty interrupted her.

This is an atom: 
"But," she said hastily, "I think it might be just as well to try the less
spectacular method first. Don't you?"

This is an atom: 
Both Amy and Grace heaved a great sigh of disappointment.

This is an atom: 
"For one beautiful moment," said Grace plaintively, "I dared to hope that
you were with us, Betty."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, I am!" exclaimed the latter, wilfully misunderstanding. "With
you to the death, if need be. But look," she added as they turned a
corner, "Methinks we have pretty nearly reached the scene of our
activity."

This is an atom: 
"Methinks it's pretty nearly time," groaned Grace.

This is an atom: 
"I tell you what we'll do," suggested Betty, as they crowded eagerly about
her. "It will save time, and, I think, be the easiest way. We'll each one
take an entire street, visit as many of the houses as possible within an
hour, and at the end of that time we'll meet here again and each make her
report."

This is an atom: 
The others agreed to this, and they separated, each determined to find as
many boarding places as possible for those relatives and friends who
wished to be near their soldier boys.

This is an atom: 
At the end of the hour they met again, looking a little warm and tired,
but immensely triumphant.

This is an atom: 
Grace was wildly excited.

This is an atom: 
"Yes, I found places," she said, in answer to a question from Betty. "But
what do you think?--I saw that motorcyclist."

This is an atom: 
"You did!" came in a chorus from the other Outdoor Girls.

This is an atom: 
"Of course you mean the rascal who ran down poor Mrs. Sanderson," came
from Mollie.

This is an atom: 
"The same. I was so startled I hardly knew what to do. He was coming from
a small hotel--not a very nice place."

This is an atom: 
"Maybe that is where he plays cards," suggested Betty.

This is an atom: 
"As soon as he saw me he leaped on his motorcycle and left in a hurry,
before I had a chance to say a word to him."

This is an atom: 
"What a shame that you didn't have a chance to have him arrested," cried
Amy.

This is an atom: 
The girls talked the matter over for several minutes. As the motorcyclist
was gone there seemed nothing they could do.

This is an atom: 
"But we'll keep our eyes open for him," declared Betty.

This is an atom: 
"I think this is the most wonderful town," Mollie remarked after a pause.
"Why there's hardly a house that I visited but what the people were
willing to accommodate at least one boarder, and in some cases two or
three, and, what's more," waving her hand enthusiastically, "several of
them didn't even want to take any money for it."

This is an atom: 
"And I found almost the very same thing," agreed Betty, as they linked
arms and started on the homeward walk. "I guess we have enough promises to
start with now, and I don't think we'll have any trouble finding quarters
for all who want them."

This is an atom: 
"I shouldn't wonder if Mrs. Watson is right about our reputation," said
Grace, a little ruefully. "Because the minute Mrs. Robinson opened the
door and saw me she said she hadn't the slightest idea what I was going to
ask her this time, but, seeing it was one of the girls from the Hostess
House, she expected to say yes, anyway."

This is an atom: 
The girls laughed and for some time afterward walked on in silence, busy
with their thoughts. Then suddenly Betty spoke.

This is an atom: 
"Girls," she said soberly, "Mrs. Sanderson is almost well again and I
don't think we'll be able to keep her with us very much longer."

This is an atom: 
"What do you mean?" they cried together, their voices showing how very
real their concern was.

This is an atom: 
"Well," Betty explained slowly, "it seems she overheard some of us girls
talking about the rush of work in store for us and got it into her head
that we might need her room."

This is an atom: 
"But I don't see what difference that makes," protested Mollie. "As long
as we're doubling up and giving her our room."

This is an atom: 
"Well, of course, it appears that way to us," replied Betty, shaking her
head thoughtfully. "But I'm afraid we can't hope to make her see it so.
Anyway, Mrs. Watson said she spoke to her about it and said she would be
going as soon as she had a chance to say good-bye to the 'young ladies.'"

This is an atom: 
For a long time the girls stared straight before them, deeply troubled. It
was not so much the thought of losing the old lady, although, having grown
fond of her, they would miss her badly, as it was the realization that
here was one person in deep trouble, whose burden they could not seem in
any way to lighten.

This is an atom: 
"And we haven't been able to get hold of that motorcyclist," mourned
Mollie. "It makes me simply ferocious," she added, with sudden vigor, "to
think of his getting away with a thing like that and not even a day in
prison to show for it."

This is an atom: 
"And now with the boys gone," added Amy, "I don't suppose we'll have a
chance in the world of capturing him."

This is an atom: 
"Humph," groaned Grace disgustedly, the temporary glow of success fading
before the torture of aching feet, "I don't see that they helped very much
when they were here. We did the suggesting, and all they did was to laugh
at our suggestions--"

This is an atom: 
"Well, there's no use in saying things about them now they're gone," said
Amy, but Mollie caught her up indignantly.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, Amy," she cried, "it may not be your fault that you have a
gloomy disposition, but you don't need to sound exactly like a funeral!"

This is an atom: 
At this moment they were startled by the sound of a machine coming behind
them at furious speed. Some chickens, crossing the road and pecking lazily
as they went, scurried with alarmed squawking into the woods on either
side.

This is an atom: 
The girls, turning, started, gasped, then stared at each other.

This is an atom: 
"The motorcyclist!" cried Mollie, as they turned and ran after the fast
disappearing machine.

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XXI

This is an atom: 
THE CHASE

This is an atom: 
"I--I--don't know what we're running after him for!" gasped Mollie. "We
haven't got a chance--in the world--of catching--him."

This is an atom: 
"Look," panted Betty, pointing to a machine at the side of the road with a
man in chauffeur's uniform sitting behind the wheel, "maybe we can get
him! Quick--"

This is an atom: 
Betty's action always followed hard upon the heels of impulse, and before
any of the girls had time to realize what she was going to do she had
darted across the road, had said a few excited words, and was tumbling
into the tonneau.

This is an atom: 
Without stopping to question, the girls followed, jumping in beside her,
and the chauffeur, after one surprised look, touched his cap and the
machine leapt forward like a wild thing.

This is an atom: 
Mollie had time, even in her excitement, to wonder how Betty had managed
it.

This is an atom: 
"I think she hypnotizes them," she muttered to herself.

This is an atom: 
And all Betty had really said to the man was, "Please follow that
motorcyclist! We mustn't lose sight of him!" and the man, obeying that
impulse for adventure that is in all of us, had complied.

This is an atom: 
The motorcyclist had sped around the corner and darted into one of the
side streets. A few minutes later the chauffeur turned the same corner
with a recklessness that made them gasp, turned it just in time to see
their quarry disappearing round another corner.

This is an atom: 
"Gosh, that fellow can coax some speed out of that machine of his!" cried
the man at the wheel. "But if you young ladies don't mind a little danger,
we may catch him yet."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, please don't think about us," cried Betty, her hands clutching the
back of the seat, her eyes straining after the flying speck that seemed to
be growing smaller every second. "Oh, we must catch him,--we must! It
would be awful to lose him now!"

This is an atom: 
"Well, here goes," responded the man behind the wheel, and under his
skillful touch the machine leapt forward like a spirited horse at the
touch of the lash.

This is an atom: 
"That's it, that's it!" cried Mollie, almost beside herself with
excitement. "Just hear that engine purr! He can't get away from us now!"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, if we could only take him back to Camp Liberty with us!"

This is an atom: 
"I thought so," said the chauffeur, and even in their excitement they had
time to look in surprise at his back.

This is an atom: 
"Wh-what did you think?" stammered Betty.

This is an atom: 
"That you were the girls up at the Hostess House that everybody is talking
about," he told her, while the girls fairly gasped with surprise at this
proof of their widespread fame. "That's why I didn't ask questions but
just did as I was told," he added. And somehow they knew, though they
could not see his face, that he was grinning. "You see, I'd always heard
that you most always got what you set out to get, and I didn't waste time
arguin'," he finished.

This is an atom: 
The girls laughed hysterically, and Betty said, with a funny little
inflection:

This is an atom: 
"Sounds as if we were very strong-minded. But we don't care about that,"
she added, once more fixing her gaze anxiously on the road before them,
"if we can only catch that man."

This is an atom: 
"May I ask who he is, miss?" asked the man.

This is an atom: 
"He's--he's a--criminal!" returned Betty, her little fists clenched
fiercely.

This is an atom: 
"A criminal?" he repeated with interest. "May I ask what kind?"

This is an atom: 
"A murderer," cried Mollie fiercely, adding, as the man started and the
girls looked at her in surprise: "Well, he might just as well have been.
He didn't even stop to see whether he was or not, which is about the same
thing."

This is an atom: 
There was a sound from the front seat that sounded suspiciously like a
chuckle, but not being quite sure, the girls could do nothing whatever
about it.

This is an atom: 
"But look--he's getting away from us!" wailed Amy suddenly, and once more
all their attention was focused on the chase.

This is an atom: 
And, quite suddenly, while they watched, the motorcyclist disappeared from
view as if the earth had opened and swallowed him up.

This is an atom: 
A few seconds later, with a grinding of brakes, the car stopped at the
spot where he had disappeared, and the girls looked at one another
despairingly.

This is an atom: 
The path that he had taken seemed no more than a broad foot path through
the woods, so narrow that no machine could follow him, and of course there
was no chance of catching him on foot.

This is an atom: 
"He got away from us!" cried Grace, voicing a rather self-evident fact.

This is an atom: 
"I'm afraid so, miss," said the man, and he seemed so genuinely
disappointed that they looked at him gratefully. "The man must be rather
much of a dare-devil, your criminal," he added, eyeing the bumpy path
thoughtfully. "An ordinary rider wouldn't be able to go two yards along
that path without coming to grief."

This is an atom: 
"Do you know where this path leads to?" asked Betty, struck with a sudden
inspiration. "If there's another road we might circle round and head him
off."

This is an atom: 
"Sorry, miss," he said, "but the road that path leads to is nothing but a
wagon road, and we'd have to go several miles before we'd cross it. And
the chances are," he added, "that the fellow would double back upon
himself and we'd have the run for nothing."

This is an atom: 
Betty shook her head resignedly, for, hard as it was to relinquish the
man, all that the chauffeur had said was founded on hard common sense and
she could see there was no alternative.

This is an atom: 
"I guess you're right," she said at last, after a pause during which the
girls had looked at her hopefully. Betty so often found a way where no one
else could that they never completely gave up hope until she herself
relinquished it.

This is an atom: 
So now they sighed and climbed soberly back into the machine.

This is an atom: 
"Where to?" inquired the chauffeur, as he turned the car and headed back
the way they had come. "If you're going back to the camp," he suggested,
"I can take you there. Or anywhere you say."

This is an atom: 
"You've been awfully good," cried Betty, with real gratitude in her voice.
"But you don't have to take us away back to camp. If you will drop us at
the end of the road we can walk back." All this despite sundry vigorous
and desperate shakings of Grace's head and pantomimic pointings toward her
feet. At the conclusion of Betty's sentence she groaned, but brightened up
again at the chauffeur's response.

This is an atom: 
"It won't be any trouble," he said, "to take you all the way back to camp.
In fact"--a little shyly--"I'd like to."

This is an atom: 
"Then we'd be very, very glad to accept," said Betty cordially. "For we
have walked a long way and are rather tired."

This is an atom: 
At the gates of Camp Liberty they got out of the car, thanked the
chauffeur, and while they were hesitating whether or not to offer him
money for his trouble, the latter turned the car and, with a last lifting
of his cap and waving of his hand, was gone.

This is an atom: 
"Isn't he nice?" sighed Amy, as they started toward the Hostess House,
Grace limping a little and bringing up the rear. "Meeting a man like that
gives you new faith in human nature."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, Will had better look out," chaffed Mollie, a little gleam of
humor shining through her weariness. "I always thought you had it in you
to run off with a chauffeur, Amy."

This is an atom: 
Before Amy had time to retort they saw a stalwart and familiar figure
swinging toward them and recognized Sergeant Mullins.

This is an atom: 
"Good afternoon," he called to them, with the smile that always so
surprisingly lighted up his usually grave face. "You look as if you had
had rather an exciting time of it."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, we did almost have such a beautiful adventure!" cried Mollie, her
eyes sparkling with the memory of it.

This is an atom: 
"And all we really got," said Grace gloomily, "were four pairs of sore
feet."

This is an atom: 
Sergeant Mullins laughed at her with the rest, then asked, with real
interest:

This is an atom: 
"But the adventure that you almost had,--would you mind telling me about
it?"

This is an atom: 
Whereupon Betty launched into a full and graphic account of the chase in
somebody else's automobile after an unknown criminal who, at the last
minute, had escaped in an apparently impossible manner.

This is an atom: 
"And that's all there is to it," she finished plaintively. "After all our
trouble and everything, we find ourselves just where we were before."

This is an atom: 
The sergeant looked very grave.

This is an atom: 
"The man was a cad," he said, "to knock down an old woman that way and
then not stop to see how badly she was hurt. I wish you could have won out
to-day. Could you give a good description of him?"

This is an atom: 
"Yes, I can," cried both Amy and Grace in the same breath, and thereupon
proceeded to do it without delay. At the description the sergeant's
interest grew and his face flushed with excitement.

This is an atom: 
When they had finished, Betty, who had been watching his face closely,
unable to restrain her curiosity longer, burst forth an eager question.

This is an atom: 
"Have you seen the man, Sergeant?"

This is an atom: 
"I think I have--often," he replied slowly, adding as they turned
incredulous eyes upon him. "If I'm not mistaken, this criminal of yours is
one of the most famous card sharpers of the day."

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XXII

This is an atom: 
STARTLING DEVELOPMENTS

This is an atom: 
For a moment the girls stared. Then Sergeant Mullins was besieged with a
veritable flood of questions.

This is an atom: 
"He hangs out mostly at Thomasville, a town about fifteen miles from
here," the sergeant explained, when at last the girls had realized that if
they ever hoped to learn anything at all they must give the man a chance
to speak. "And he makes most of his money by skinning the rookies."

This is an atom: 
"You mean," cried Betty, translating camp slang into intelligible English,
"that he gets the newly enlisted men to play with him before they have a
chance to learn his reputation, and of course gets all their money,
because his game is crooked?"

This is an atom: 
"Exactly," agreed Sergeant Mullins, his grave face clouding angrily. "And
equally, of course, it's the week following pay day when he makes his big
haul. I hope you succeed in getting him," he said, turning earnestly to
Betty. "And if there's anything I can do to help, you can count on me."

This is an atom: 
Betty thanked him, and the girls watched the Sergeant's straight,
retreating back with thoughtful eyes.

This is an atom: 
"Well, it's a comfort anyway," said Mollie, as they turned and went into
the house, "to know that he's as bad as we thought he was. And perhaps,"
she added hopefully, "Sergeant Mullins will be able to help us."

This is an atom: 
It was more than a week later when the first eagerly looked for letters
began to arrive from overseas. It was one day when the promised rush of
soldiers into the camp had been fulfilled and the girls were particularly
busy entertaining and finding comfortable quarters for their relatives and
friends that Mollie whispered the joyful news into Betty's ear.

This is an atom: 
"Letters!" she cried. "Letters, honey! Here are yours, two of them, and
each one of us others got one apiece. We've decided not to open them until
to-night, when we'll have time to read them in comfort. If you'll wait,
too--"

This is an atom: 
"Of course," promised Betty, eagerly accepting her portion of the precious
correspondence. "And they're thick ones, Mollie, and--"

This is an atom: 
"Both from Allen," Mollie finished mischievously, looking back over her
shoulder to enjoy Betty's blush.

This is an atom: 
And that night, when they should have been tired out with the day's
unusually hard work, the girls assembled in their one big room, feeling
more wide awake than ever before in all their lives.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, hasn't it been perfectly awful," cried Mollie, facing them with
shining eyes, "to have to go around calmly for hours and hours as if
nothing had happened?"

This is an atom: 
"With a letter just begging to be read, too!" put in Betty, two fever
spots of excitement on her cheeks. "I don't think I could ever do it
again."

This is an atom: 
"Well, it's all over now," said Amy, taking her own thick and promising
looking letter from her silk blouse where it had rustled and crackled
betrayingly all day. "I don't know about you girls, but I just can't wait
another second."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, please wait just a moment until I get my shoes off," begged Grace,
sinking down on the edge of the bed and removing the shoes from her aching
feet. "Oh dear," she moaned, "I know I'll have to get a size larger next
time, and if I do I'll be ashamed to be seen in the street."

This is an atom: 
"Well, even my patient and much-tried pedal extremities feel a little the
worse for wear to-night," admitted Mollie, as she flung a shoe
vindictively to the farthest corner of the room.

This is an atom: 
"And mine," agreed Betty, taking up the plaint. "I tell you what," she
added. "Let's all just get undressed and tumble into the big bed
and--enjoy ourselves."

This is an atom: 
The suggestion was unanimously accepted, and thereafter various soft and
filmy garments flew thick and fast as the girls got ready for the treat
which had been postponed all through the long, long day,--almost the
longest they had ever known.

This is an atom: 
"Come on, Gracie," called Mollie, as barely five minutes later three
figures sat propped up in the bed, waiting impatiently for the fourth.
"What's the use of primping to-night? Nobody's going to see you."

This is an atom: 
"You flatter yourself," drawled Grace, as she turned away from the mirror.
"Anyway, I once read that a girl should never allow herself to look
homely, even when she's alone."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, if I have to work so hard to be beautiful," retorted Mollie,
holding her letter up to the light in a vain attempt to read its contents
through the envelope, "I'd rather be good and homely and comfortable."

This is an atom: 
"If all wishes were so easily granted," Grace began, but at the look in
Mollie's eyes thought better of it. "I meant," she corrected herself
blandly, "that, of course, you can never be anything but beautiful,
Mollie."

This is an atom: 
"Well, I don't know, of course," said Mollie, with the same vengeful light
in her eyes, "but I'm always suspicious of any one who goes to extremes."

This is an atom: 
"Never mind your suspicions, Mollie," cried Betty, with a happy ring in
her voice, as the last of the quartette climbed in under the covers. "All
that really interests me now is the fact that I have a couple of letters
that are just begging to be read."

This is an atom: 
"Yes, and I'd like to know if that's fair," said Grace, looking injured.
"We only got one apiece, while here you are rolling in luxury--"

This is an atom: 
"And they're both in the same handwriting--Allen's of course," added Amy,
peeping over Betty's shoulder. "Why does he write you two letters that he
knows will both reach you in the same mail, Betty?"

This is an atom: 
"Just to be original, I suppose," answered Betty, striving to speak calmly
while a hot flush mounted to her forehead. "Anyway," she added lightly, "I
suppose the best way to satisfy our curiosity would be to read our letters
and find out."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, I forgot," cried Grace, pushing back the covers and slipping out of
bed. "There's just one thing better than reading letters."

This is an atom: 
"Now what are you after?" cried Mollie despairingly. "Well," she added,
tearing open her letter decidedly, "there's one thing certain,--I'm not
going to wait another minute!"

This is an atom: 
"Well, nobody asked you to," retorted Grace, slipping back into bed with
the precious candy box under her arm. "And, what's more," she added
threateningly, "if you're going to be uncivil, I won't ask you to share my
candies."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness! now isn't that the limit?" cried Betty suddenly, and they
looked at her in surprise. She, in her turn, having thought aloud, flushed
and turned back to the letter. "I'm sorry," she stammered. "I really
didn't mean to interrupt you."

This is an atom: 
"No you don't, Betty Nelson!" cried Mollie, slipping a hand over Allen's
letter and forcing Betty to meet her eyes. "We won't any of us read
another word till you tell us what you were going to say."

This is an atom: 
"Well, you don't need to," Betty was beginning when she met Mollie's eyes
and laughed resignedly.

This is an atom: 
"Oh, all right," she capitulated. "I was simply going to say that the nosy
old censor crossed out a whole line just at the most interesting part."

This is an atom: 
"What was it?" coaxed Amy teasingly. "Come, Betty dear, tell us what he
said."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness!" cried Betty crossly, getting redder every moment, and knowing
it, "didn't I tell you the censor crossed it out?"

This is an atom: 
"You know very well that wasn't what we meant," cried Mollie, with a
frightful frown. "Amy was referring to the sentiments on both sides of the
censored part."

This is an atom: 
"Oh well, you could hardly expect," Betty was beginning, when Amy, who had
been peeping over her shoulder clapped a hand to her mouth too late to
check a sudden exclamation.

This is an atom: 
"Oh girls!" she cried gleefully. "What I saw! What I saw!"

This is an atom: 
"Amy Blackford," Betty's eyes were black with real anger now, "I don't
know how you could do such a thing. I didn't think it of you!"

This is an atom: 
Not only Amy, but the other girls were frightened by this sudden change in
their usually good-natured Little Captain, and Amy hastened to make
amends.

This is an atom: 
"I'm sorry, Betty dear," she said, flushing with real shame beneath
Betty's accusing eyes. "I didn't mean it--truly I didn't. And I'll never
do it again, never!"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, all right," replied Betty, controlling herself with an effort and
turning back to the letter. "I'm sorry I said anything, Amy, if you
didn't mean it."

This is an atom: 
There was a little constrained silence after that, no one knowing just how
to clear the rather electric atmosphere. They went on reading absorbedly,
only the crackling of the paper as they turned a page breaking the deep
stillness of the room.

This is an atom: 
It was Betty who finally relieved the tension.

This is an atom: 
"If that doesn't sound just like Roy," she said, and they looked up
expectantly, relieved at the naturalness of her tone. "Allen says that
he--Roy, that is--was very much impressed with his first sight of a
camouflaged ship. Said he had devised a fine scheme of killing off the
German army in a hurry. He'd disguise himself as a piece of Limburger
cheese, and when the Huns came running to him, he'd simply give them a
gentle little tap on the head."

This is an atom: 
"Humph," snorted Mollie contemptuously, "how long do you suppose he'd be
able to keep that up?"

This is an atom: 
"He says they'd never suspect the truth," Betty chuckled. "They'd simply
think it was a particularly husky piece of cheese!"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XXIII

This is an atom: 
THE MIRACLE

This is an atom: 
It was only a few days later that the wonderful, the incredible thing
happened!

This is an atom: 
The girls were returning from a rather hurried excursion to a near-by town
when they came face to face with the motorcyclist. His motor had evidently
stalled, and he was standing in the middle of the road tinkering with it.

This is an atom: 
Paralyzed by the suddenness of the thing, the girls just stood still and
stared until the man, evidently feeling their eyes upon him, turned slowly
about and faced them.

This is an atom: 
He seemed to recognize them immediately, for his first look of
bewilderment was followed quickly by one of fear, and with an abrupt
motion he turned back to his machine.

This is an atom: 
"Now we have him, what are we going to do with him?" whispered Mollie, a
comical look of chagrin on her face. "We can't capture him all by
ourselves, and we can hardly expect him to wait while we get some one."

This is an atom: 
"He is huskier than I thought," admitted Grace, adding suddenly, "Betty,
what are you going to do?"

This is an atom: 
But Betty either did not hear or did not want to, for she was approaching
the man without a backward glance in their direction. Though not knowing
just what was about to happen, the girls followed loyally, close at her
heels.

This is an atom: 
As for Betty, she simply stepped up close to the man and stood looking at
him steadily, finally forcing him by sheer concentration to straighten up
and meet her eyes.

This is an atom: 
"Well, who are you?" he demanded at last, gruffly.

This is an atom: 
"That was just the question I was about to put to you," Betty replied, and
by her outward composure no one could possibly have guessed how hard her
heart was beating. "We are really quite desirous of knowing all about
you."

This is an atom: 
"May I ask," he said, his cruel mouth sneering under the absurd moustache,
"what has happened to arouse this sudden interest?"

This is an atom: 
The sneer brought a flush to Betty's face and made her eyes glow angrily.

This is an atom: 
"You ought to know that without my telling you," she said coldly. "Perhaps
you will remember, if I recall it to you, the day you knocked an old woman
down in the middle of the road and then rode away without finding out how
seriously you had injured her."

This is an atom: 
"I really don't know what you're talking about," the man replied, with an
attempt to appear frank, which made his face more sinister than before.
"You must have mistaken me for some one else."

This is an atom: 
"That's impossible." Mollie's voice was crisp and clear cut, and the man
glanced with surprise and a shadow of alarm at this new assailant.

This is an atom: 
Then suddenly his manner of cool insolence changed, and he shot them a
look that remained quiveringly in their memories long after the man
himself had passed forever out of their lives.

This is an atom: 
"Whoever you are, you're fools," he said gruffly, menacingly. "And if you
don't forget all about this thing you've been spouting about, I'll make it
pretty darned unpleasant for you. Get me?" And, with a quick movement, he
started his motor and leaped on his machine.

This is an atom: 
Betty sprang forward and desperately clutched the handle bars, calling on
the girls for assistance, but he roughly pushed her aside. At the same
moment the machine leapt forward and Betty knew that he would get away
again.

This is an atom: 
Then it was the first miracle happened. Sergeant Mullins, out on a hike
with some of the rookies from the camp, the sound of his approach
deadened by the putting of the machine, appeared around the turn in the
road, coming toward them. To keep from running into the men, which would
have meant a nasty spill, the motorcyclist was forced to put on his brake.

This is an atom: 
The men would have gathered to one side of the road to let him pass, but
Betty's shrill cry arrested them.

This is an atom: 
"Don't let him pass," she implored them desperately. "It's our criminal,
Sergeant Mullins! Don't you see? The gambler!"

This is an atom: 
But Sergeant Mullins, in one swift glance, had already taken in the
situation, and as the man tried to start his machine he sprang forward and
grasped the handle bars, at the same time shouting orders to his men.

This is an atom: 
"Surround him, fellows!" he cried. "This man is under arrest!"

This is an atom: 
"What do you mean?" cried the gambler, his eyes glaring with the rage of a
cornered animal.

This is an atom: 
"Don't waste your breath, Denham," retorted Sergeant Mullins coolly, "your
reputation isn't any too good around these parts, you know, and you'll
have plenty of chance to do your shouting to the judge.

This is an atom: 
"Never mind your machine," he added sharply, as the fellow's mean eyes
glanced about desperately for means of escape. "The boys will take care
of that. And," he added meaningly, "I have rather a life-sized impression
that you won't be needing it again for some time to come!"

This is an atom: 
Denham shot him a vicious glance, and got off sullenly from his machine
while a group of soldiers stepped up smartly to take charge of it.

This is an atom: 
With his prisoner safely guarded, Sergeant Mullins ordered the march back
to camp, then drew in a long breath and looked at the girls.

This is an atom: 
"Well," he said, with his slow smile, "you did it that time."

This is an atom: 
"We!" cried Betty, her cheeks flushed with excitement and the exhilaration
of success. "I should say you did the work while we looked on. Oh, I'm so
happy--and so grateful to you."

This is an atom: 
"But I didn't do anything," he protested, smiling whimsically, as they
turned to follow the soldiers and their prisoner. "I simply let the boys
do the work while I looked on."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness! what do we care how it happened as long as it did?" cried
Mollie happily. "Maybe now he'll see that he can't run down old ladies
promiscuously and get away with it."

This is an atom: 
"Not with girls like you on his trail," said the sergeant admiringly.

This is an atom: 
"But what are you going to do with him, now you've got him?" asked Grace,
repeating almost word for word the question Mollie had put only a few
minutes before. "I suppose we've got to get out some sort of definite
charge against him."

This is an atom: 
"Yes," said the sergeant thoughtfully. "We can put him in the guardhouse
up at camp till we have a chance to get the township authorities up here.
And," he added, turning to Betty, "I'd like to have an interview with that
old lady of yours, if you can manage it. We'll have to have her evidence,
you know."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, and isn't it lucky?" cried Betty, executing a little skip in her
excitement. "She told us only this morning that she was feeling perfectly
well again and would go away to-morrow. We were worrying ourselves sick
about it, but couldn't think up a single plan to keep her with us. And if
she had gone before this happened--" she stopped, overwhelmed by the mere
contemplation of the tragedy.

This is an atom: 
"I still feel as if I were dreaming," said Amy, as they entered the camp
gate. "It all happened so suddenly, and just when we were feeling so
awfully blue."

This is an atom: 
"Well, I know I wasn't dreaming," said Grace plaintively, "because in my
excitement I dropped two perfectly good candies in the road and forgot to
pick 'em up."

This is an atom: 
They laughed at her, and Betty added whimsically:

This is an atom: 
"Perhaps it was just as well for your digestion that you did. I suppose
you'll have to go to the guardhouse to explain about the prisoner," she
rather stated than asked, turning to Sergeant Mullins.

This is an atom: 
"Yes," he said, adding, with a trace of hesitation: "It won't take long
though, and if you don't mind waiting till I get back I'd like to have
that talk with the old lady he knocked down. It's necessary to see her as
soon as possible."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, we don't mind waiting," cried Betty. "And you can't see her too
quickly to suit us. We're just crazy to see the whole thing settled--"

This is an atom: 
"And that brute behind the bars," finished Mollie vindictively.

This is an atom: 
Sergeant Mullins laughed boyishly, saluted smartly, and turned on his heel
to follow the boys who were fast bearing the prisoner to the guardhouse
and from there to the just punishment that had been so long in overtaking
him.

This is an atom: 
"Well," said Mollie, as she flopped down on the steps and favored the
girls with a beaming smile, "now what have you got to say for yourselves?"

This is an atom: 
"More in truth than in modesty," twinkled the Little Captain, "I should
say that we are pretty good."

This is an atom: 
"My! don't we love us?" queried Grace, fishing up from her pocket a
much-mangled and sadly worn chocolate and calmly inserting it between two
very pretty rows of white teeth. "It's really touching--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Grace, how can you think of candies at a time like this?" cried
Mollie impatiently.

This is an atom: 
"Don't know," returned Grace, calmly nibbling. "It's a gift, I guess."

This is an atom: 
"Gracie, you're an awful goose," cried Betty, hugging her impulsively.
"But I'm so happy, I'll forgive you even that--"

This is an atom: 
"It's you that ought to be forgiven for calling me names," returned Grace,
in an injured tone of voice. "Goodness," she cried, a moment later,
pointing a moist and tired chocolate in the direction of the horizon. "Am
I mistaken, or is that the stalwart figure of our sergeant approaching in
the distance?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, it is, it is!" cried Betty, springing to her feet and fairly dancing
in her excitement and impatience. "Oh, I can't wait! Why doesn't he
hurry?"

This is an atom: 
As a matter of fact, the sergeant was hurrying very much indeed, for he
was almost as eager as the girls to see the old lady and collect the
evidence in the case against the motorcyclist.

This is an atom: 
He was panting as he sprang up the steps toward them and his eyes were
bright with anticipation.

This is an atom: 
"I got back as soon as I could," he cried. "Now, if you can take me--"

This is an atom: 
The girls wasted no time in words, and led him swiftly up the stairs,
pausing before Mrs. Sanderson's door.

This is an atom: 
"What shall we do if she's gone?" whispered Betty, a sudden panic seizing
her. Then, without further delay, rapped smartly on the door.

This is an atom: 
At the answering "come in" they tumbled into the room, followed by
Sergeant Mullins. Then it was the second miracle happened!

This is an atom: 
Mrs. Sanderson started, stared, then rose tremblingly to her feet.

This is an atom: 
"My Willie boy!" she cried, groping toward him, dazed, unbelieving,
incredulous. "It's my boy, my little son--my--baby--"

This is an atom: 
Then Sergeant Mullins, with a hoarse cry, rushed across the room and
gathered the little figure in his arms--strong, man's arms that crushed
and hurt.

This is an atom: 
"Mother!" he cried. "Oh, my mother!"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XXIV

This is an atom: 
MYSTERY EXPLAINED

This is an atom: 
The girls stared for a moment, dazed, bewildered. Stared at the dark head
bent in such passionate tenderness over the gray one, stared at the old
hands patting the broad young shoulders, tremblingly, joyfully,
incredulously, then, with a stifled gasp, turned and fled.

This is an atom: 
Betty closed the door softly and followed the girls into their own room
where they sank down on arms of chairs or tables or the edge of the
bed--any place--and went on staring, only this time at each other.

This is an atom: 
"Betty Nelson," Mollie broke out at last, her eyes dark and wide, her
voice awed, "did you ever in your life hear of such a thing?"

This is an atom: 
"Of course I never did," answered Betty, her lips trembling, her eyes
shining and wet. "Not since my fairy-story days, anyway," she added
softly.

This is an atom: 
"But how," Grace demanded, still too dazed to think clearly, "can Mrs.
Sanderson's son be William Mullins?"

This is an atom: 
"Goodness! how do we know?" returned Mollie, wiping two tears from the end
of her nose. "It's all the biggest kind of a m-mystery, anyway. Oh, dear,
has anybody got a handkerchief?" as two other tears threatened to make
their appearance. "I didn't know I had it in me to be such a goose."

This is an atom: 
"We seldom do realize our possibilities," drawled Grace, but Mollie was
too busy wiping away the traces of her weakness to notice the insult.

This is an atom: 
"And to think," Amy murmured softly, "that if that old motorcyclist hadn't
knocked Mrs. Sanderson down, she would have gone away without finding her
son, and the chances are she would never have seen him again."

This is an atom: 
"I suppose you think we ought to send the motorcyclist a vote of thanks,"
remarked Mollie dryly, recovering herself a little. "If he keeps on
knocking old ladies down in the middle of the road and then gets himself
arrested, he may be counted on to do a lot of good in the world."

This is an atom: 
"I don't see how you can say such silly things," Amy began hotly, when
Betty broke in pleadingly:

This is an atom: 
"Please, please, girls!" she said, smiling as only Betty knew how to
smile. "What is the use of quarreling about miracles? The most wonderful
thing in all the world has happened, and what do we care how it happened?
Just think of it!" she added, leaning forward eagerly. "Only this morning
we were feeling discouraged and down-hearted because Mrs. Sanderson was
going away to-morrow and we couldn't think of a thing to do to help her.
Then all in one day, in an hour, really, we capture the motorcyclist and
find her son for her. It's no wonder I can't seem to make myself believe I
haven't dreamed it all," she finished, with such a look of utter happiness
on her face that Mollie slipped an arm about her and hugged her fondly.

This is an atom: 
"You know, Betty," she said solemnly, "I'm almost beginning to have a
superstitious belief in you."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness! Why?" cried Betty, while the other two looked at Mollie
wonderingly. "What have I done now that you should say such things and
treat me thus?"

This is an atom: 
"Why, I was just thinking," Mollie replied with rare earnestness, "that,
as usual, if it hadn't been for you we probably wouldn't have arrested the
gambler--or rather, given Sergeant Mullins a chance to--and so wouldn't
have brought him here to find out he belonged to our little old lady."

This is an atom: 
"But I don't see how--" Betty was beginning in real bewilderment when
Mollie interrupted her impatiently.

This is an atom: 
"I don't suppose you do," she said, with fond severity. "You never do give
yourself credit for anything, anyway, Betty Nelson. But who was it, I'd
like to know, that first had courage to go up and speak to that criminal?"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, that!" said Betty, sinking back relievedly. "Anybody could have done
that."

This is an atom: 
"Perhaps anybody could," retorted Mollie practically. "But you notice
nobody else did, don't you, Betty Nelson?"

This is an atom: 
"Well, I know, but that didn't have anything to do with capturing him,"
argued Betty, determined not to take any more than her share of the
credit--and not that, if she could help it. "If Sergeant Mullins hadn't
happened along just at that moment, he'd have gotten away from us the way
he did those other times."

This is an atom: 
"Yes, but who delayed him, I'd like to know," Mollie flung back
triumphantly, "and gave the Sergeant time to come along and finish up the
work?"

This is an atom: 
"All right," laughed Betty. "I'll admit that much, since you insist. But
what earthly difference does it make, anyway, as long as it's done?" she
cried. "Just think," her voice trembled a little, "how happy those two
must be in there! I--I--oh, I can't believe it yet."

This is an atom: 
"Well, but that's still troubling me," said Grace, so apropos of nothing
at all that they just stared at her.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, don't look at me like that," she cried irritably, getting up
and walking round the room. "You know I always did hate mysteries."

This is an atom: 
"We should be very much obliged," said Mollie, with forced politeness, "if
you would tell us what you're raving about."

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, don't you even see there is a mystery?" she cried, facing them
impatiently. "How in the world could Sergeant Mullins ever be Mrs.
Sanderson's son?"

This is an atom: 
"You'd better ask 'em," chuckled Mollie. "They both seemed so tolerably
sure of it that we've taken it for granted. What's the deep, dark
mystery?"

This is an atom: 
"Grace means," it was Amy who acted the peacemaker this time, "that it's
strange about the name."

This is an atom: 
"And, of course, it is," Betty added gravely. "Sergeant Mullins should by
all rights be Sergeant Sanderson."

This is an atom: 
"And Mrs. Sanderson couldn't have known about his being called Mullins,"
Grace broke in eagerly, "because we've spoken to her of Sergeant Mullins
more than once, and she never acted as though more than casually
interested."

This is an atom: 
"Well, but I suppose that's easily enough explained," said Mollie, who was
in no mood for details--the actual occurrences being wonderful enough in
themselves to occupy her attention for some time to come. "People often
enough change their last names for some reason or other."

This is an atom: 
"Then you mean," said Grace, "that William Mullins is really William
Sanderson?"

This is an atom: 
"A fair assumption," returned Mollie dryly. "Unless Mrs. Sanderson's name
is Mullins."

This is an atom: 
"Perhaps the best way," suggested Betty peaceably, "would be to wait and
let Mrs. Sanderson tell us about it."

This is an atom: 
"Wait--" Grace was beginning, when a gentle tap sounded on the door and
Betty flew to open it.

This is an atom: 
On the threshold stood Mrs. Sanderson, her eyes red with weeping, yet her
whole face so transformed with joy that the girls would hardly have
recognized her as the Mrs. Sanderson of that morning. Instinctively they
glanced over her shoulder, expecting to see the tall figure of Sergeant
Mullins looming in the background, but he was nowhere to be seen.

This is an atom: 
"He's--he's gone," said the little old lady tremulously, seeming to
interpret their glances, at the same time coming timidly into the room.
"He told me to tell you," her face lighted up still more with that
wonderful inward joy, "that he would have stayed and thanked you young
ladies, but he'd made sort of an idiot of himself--so he said--an' would
be around later, instead."

This is an atom: 
"And is he really--really--_really_ your son?" cried Betty, unable to
contain herself longer, pressing the old lady into a chair and kneeling
down before her eagerly. "Oh, we knew you'd come and tell us! We've been
so very happy for you."

This is an atom: 
"Yes, he's my Willie boy," answered the little old lady, speaking dreamily
as though even yet she was not able to grasp the wonderful thing that had
happened to her. "It's strange when I come to think of it how I knew him
right away because, you see, I've always sort o' thought of him as my
little son, my baby, and in my mind I've always seen him as he was that
day he ran away. But he's really just the same--my little Willie boy--only
taller and sort o' broader in the shoulders an' handsomer--" her voice
broke and Betty slipped a sympathetic little hand in hers while the girls
gathered closer.

This is an atom: 
"You see, I've been prayin' for this thing for a good many years," she
went on quaintly, "an' it looks like Providence sort o' saw fit to answer
me at last. An' He jest picked out the sweetes' little ladies He could
find to be His instruments."

This is an atom: 
The girls laughed unsteadily and Betty's young hand tightened on the old
one.

This is an atom: 
"We feel as if it all must be a fairy story," she said softly.

This is an atom: 
"That's jest what it is--a fairy story," cried the little old lady,
turning those wonder-filled eyes upon them.

This is an atom: 
"It must have seemed sort o' strange to you about the name," she added,
after a short pause.

This is an atom: 
Betty saw that Grace was about to interrupt, but a warning glance stopped
her.

This is an atom: 
"You see, his real name is William Mullins Sanderson. But when he ran away
he dropped the Sanderson so's they couldn't arrest him for somethin' he
didn't do--poor little lad." Her voice was very soft and her eyes
tender. "He would have come back to me, only he heard that I was dead and
thought 'twasn't any use. He said he'd jest been eatin' his heart out,
thinkin' of old days an' how he'd promised to make a fortune for us both
an' buy a big house where I wouldn't ever have to work again 'less I
wanted to. An' now he says," she straightened up and her eyes flashed with
pride in him, "he says, soon's the war is over he's goin' to make that old
dream come true.

This is an atom: 
"He'd been studyin' to be a lawyer, an' had jest passed his 'bar
exams'--so he called 'em--when the war broke out, an' he jes' couldn't
resist the call o' the bugle. O' course he couldn't!" Once more was heard
that thrill of pride. "Wasn't he my Willie boy, who had the blood of
fightin' ancestors in his veins as well as brains an' a love o' book
larnin' from his pa?

This is an atom: 
"But he says when the war's over he's goin' back to his books an' make
good, an'," with simple assurance; "I know he will. Jest think," she added
dreamily, "my little son, a lawyer!

This is an atom: 
"But I ain't never goin' to forget," she cried, flinging her head up with
a martial gesture, "that first of all, he was a soldier!"

This is an atom: 
CHAPTER XXV

This is an atom: 
TO "CARRY ON"

This is an atom: 
"I could be completely happy," sighed Betty, "if it weren't for just one
thing."

This is an atom: 
It was more than a week after the wonderful discovery in their Sergeant
Mullins as Mrs. Sanderson's long lost son, and until this afternoon the
girls had hardly been able to find a minute to get together and discuss
the remarkable affair.

This is an atom: 
But to-day they had secured very reliable substitutes to fill their places
for a few hours and the Outdoor Girls had decided to make the most of this
rare holiday.

This is an atom: 
Mollie had suggested a spin in the machine, and the girls had eagerly
assented, anxious to blow the cobwebs of hard work and confinement from
their brains and get out on the open road where they could think clearly
and freely.

This is an atom: 
Exhilarated by the rushing air and the sunshine, Mollie put on extra
speed, then gazed side-wise and wickedly at Amy.

This is an atom: 
"'Oh, Mollie, do be careful,'" she mimicked.

This is an atom: 
"'I don't care about dying, but I'd rather choose a neater death!'"

This is an atom: 
But for once Amy refused to bite. She simply smiled calmly and helped
herself to another of Grace's fast disappearing chocolates.

This is an atom: 
"Go as far as you like, dear," was her surprising comment. "I feel rather
wild and woolly myself to-day. Nothing you could do would bother me."

This is an atom: 
The girls looked surprised--Mollie anxious.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness," she said disconsolately, "that takes away half the fun. What's
the use of teasing you when you won't tease?"

This is an atom: 
"Does seem rather a waste of time," remarked Amy, and they gaped anew.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, what has come over the child?" asked Grace of Betty, adding
with sudden suspicion, "She must have had a letter."

This is an atom: 
"Did you?" they cried all at once, fixing accusing eyes upon her.

This is an atom: 
"You must be joking," Amy answered plaintively. "I haven't had a letter
for so long I don't know what it would look like."

This is an atom: 
"It is just about time we heard from the boys again," said Betty
thoughtfully. "Has anybody been to the post-office to-day?"

This is an atom: 
It seemed nobody had, for everybody had been too busy; so Mollie made an
abrupt turn, almost sending the car into a ditch, and headed back for
town.

This is an atom: 
"Now what are you doing?" queried Amy plaintively.

This is an atom: 
"Going to remedy an awful mistake," Mollie replied shortly. "I couldn't
enjoy my holiday if I thought there might be letters waiting for us."

This is an atom: 
Amy and Grace protested.

This is an atom: 
But they were not disappointed. There were not only letters from the boys,
but several fat and interesting epistles from friends and relatives in
Deepdale, including two from Paul and Dodo, Mollie's small and mischievous
brother and sister.

This is an atom: 
"Let's drive away out of town where we can be by ourselves," Betty
suggested, face radiant, fingers fairly aching to tear the precious
missives from their envelopes. "Then we can stop the car and Mollie can
read hers, too."

This is an atom: 
"You always have the right idea, Betty honey," said Mollie, with fond
emphasis, as she swung the car at breakneck speed down the street and
headed for the open country. "Now aren't you glad," she flung at Grace and
Amy, "that we made you go back with us and take a chance?"

This is an atom: 
"Don't rub it in, Mollie dear," purred Grace, too happy at the prospect
before them to contradict anything or anybody on earth. "We are deeply
appreciative and inordinately grateful to you for your wonderful
foresight and insistence."

This is an atom: 
"Is she calling me names?" cried Mollie threateningly. "For if she is, I
should like to remark for the benefit of each and every one that I am
still in possession of the wheel, and a swift and terrible doom shall
overtake--"

This is an atom: 
"Rave on, rave on, Macbeth," chuckled Betty, adding with a whimsical smile
and a quickened heart beat as she fingered the letter she had so carefully
placed under the rest: "There's no use, Mollie dear--you can't start a
rumpus now. It can't be done. We're all too good-natured."

This is an atom: 
"That's the way Frank talks after a particularly good meal," chuckled
Mollie.

This is an atom: 
"And I never saw boys who were so absolutely crazy about hot biscuits,"
sighed Amy. "If you gave them enough hot biscuits, they didn't seem to
know or care whether they had anything else or not."

This is an atom: 
"Yes, somebody was always stirring up biscuit dough when we were at Pine
Island," agreed Grace, her eyes dreamy. "I think one of us should have
invented a patent stirrer--just in self-defense!"

This is an atom: 
"Just the same, I'd wager anything," cried Betty, with a thrill in her
voice and the hint of tears behind the brightness of her eyes, "that there
isn't one of us who wouldn't be willing to make biscuits from morning
till night if we only had the boys here to eat them."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, wouldn't we!" cried Amy hungrily. "I shouldn't care if I turned into
a biscuit!"

This is an atom: 
They laughed at that, but the laugh was not scornful, for their hearts
were very full and tender.

This is an atom: 
"Sha'n't we stop here?" Mollie asked, after they had ridden a long, long
way in silence. "It's private enough--"

This is an atom: 
"Oh, yes, yes," the others interrupted her eagerly, and as Mollie guided
the car over to the side of the road, Betty sprang the news she had been
bursting to tell ever since they started.

This is an atom: 
"Girls," she cried, and quickly they turned to her, sensing something
unusual in her tone, "I have a surprise for you."

This is an atom: 
"Yes?" they cried eagerly.

This is an atom: 
"It's about our Sergeant William Mullins Sanderson," she announced, her
eyes sparkling.

This is an atom: 
"Yes?" they cried again, and Mollie added impatiently:

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Betty, don't keep us waiting. What about him?"

This is an atom: 
"Only," said Betty, speaking very slowly and distinctly, "that he's got
the thing he wanted most in the world--besides his mother. This morning he
received his overseas orders."

This is an atom: 
"Oh, Betty!" cried Mollie, her eyes big and round. "Isn't he simply wild
about it?"

This is an atom: 
"He's delirious," said Betty simply, adding, with the ring of pride in her
voice: "He seemed two inches taller when he told me about it. Oh, the
spirit of our boys--the wonderful spirit of them! It can't take them long,
it can't, when they once get started!"

This is an atom: 
"But Mrs. Sanderson," put in Amy gently. "How is she taking it?"

This is an atom: 
"I haven't seen her yet," said Betty, her face sobering a little. But it
brightened again as she added with conviction: "I think we know enough
about that little lady to be sure she'll take it standing up and be
prouder than ever of her 'Willie boy.'"

This is an atom: 
"Of course she will," said Grace softly, her eyes following the red disc
of the sun as it sank slowly in the west. "We're all awfully proud of
them, but I don't think any of us can help wishing that it were all over
instead of just beginning, and that the boys were coming home to us
victorious."

This is an atom: 
"We shouldn't be human if we didn't feel that way," said Betty soberly.
"But we haven't come to the joyful part, yet. Just now we've got to keep
cheerful and hold on hard to our hope and faith in the future. We owe that
to the boys, the boys who are fighting, perhaps dying for us, more than
we owe it to ourselves.

This is an atom: 
"But now," she added, forcing a lighter tone, "we've got a big treat
before us and we're not going to think of anything but just that. Our
letters, girls--we've been forgetting them."

This is an atom: 
The girls started, looked surprised, then instantly responded to the
challenge of her lighter tone.

This is an atom: 
"Goodness, it's you who made us forget them, Betty Nelson," cried Grace,
squeezing the Little Captain's hand fondly, then falling to with a will on
her own momentarily neglected mail. "Just see," she added wickedly,
holding up two letters with the coveted foreign postmark before their
envious eyes, "what an advantage it is to have a brother in the army as
well as a--a--"

This is an atom: 
"Well, go ahead," Betty teased, while the others laughed delightedly at
her flaming color. "What is that other thing you've got besides a brother,
the mere mention of whose name makes you the color of a beet?--I should
say," correcting herself with a demure little smile, "the color of a
flaming sunset--"

This is an atom: 
"That would be more poetic," agreed Mollie soberly, while her eyes danced.
"But either description would be correct."

This is an atom: 
"You geese," cried Grace, trying vainly to hide her flushed face behind
the letter she had opened. "I'm sure I don't know what you're talking
about."

This is an atom: 
"She remindeth me of the graceful ostrich," chanted Mollie cruelly, "who
hideth his head and thinks thereby--"

This is an atom: 
"Now I know you're calling me names," cried Grace, raising the flushed
face and glaring threateningly at the back of the mischievous Mollie.

This is an atom: 
"Well, she at least said you were graceful," chuckled Betty, tearing open
a letter from Deepdale and still reserving the best till the last.
"Anyway," she added, "we have better things to do than to engage in
useless controversy."

This is an atom: 
"I don't know what it's all about," said Mollie, settling herself
luxuriously to enjoy her own small pile of letters. "But I'll take your
word for it, Betty, just the same."

This is an atom: 
And while they read the dusk came down upon them softly like a mantle, and
the setting sun sent ruddy rays to touch their young, bowed heads.

This is an atom: 
The last paragraph of Allen's letter Betty read and reread, finally
through a mist of tears that blurred the words and ran them in together.

This is an atom: 
"It won't be long," he wrote, "before we fellows will receive the orders
that we've all been crazy for--the orders that will take us to the front.
And then, Betty, there's not a Hun that can stand before me. For I've a
memory, little girl, that will make me carry on to victory--and you. Will
you be waiting for me, Betty, when it's over? Will you want me then? For
I'm coming to you, little girl. As surely as the sun rises every morning
and sets again at night, I'm coming to you. Betty, dear, I'm loving you--"

This is an atom: 
And Betty, raising a transfigured, tremulous face, gazed straight into the
heart of the setting sun.

This is an atom: 
"Yes, I'll be waiting," she whispered to herself. "Oh, Allen, come back to
me--come back to me--soon--"

This is an atom: 
And so, in the midst of stirring scenes, with martial music always ringing
in their ears, with pride in the past and courage in the future, we once
more wave farewell to our Outdoor Girls.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
***************************************************************************