Document Name: /part2/suspicious-document02073.txt
Atom_Type: paragraph
Cluster_Method: kmeans
Plagiarized Atoms Count: 0/742
Non-Plagiarized Atoms Count: 742/742

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NON-PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is an atom: 
ï»¿Produced by Tapio Riikonen and David Widger

This is an atom: 
PASSAGES FROM THE ENGLISH NOTE-BOOKS

This is an atom: 
OF

This is an atom: 
NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

This is an atom: 
VOL. I.

This is an atom: 
To Francis Bennoch, Esq.,

This is an atom: 
The dear and valued friend, who, by his generous and genial hospitality
and unfailing sympathy, contributed so largely (as is attested by the
book itself) to render Mr. Hawthorne's residence in England agreeable and
homelike, these ENGLISH NOTES are dedicated, with sincere respect and
regard, by                 The Editor.

This is an atom: 
PREFACE

This is an atom: 
It seems justly due to Mr. Hawthorne that the occasion of any portion of
his private journals being brought before the Public should be made
known, since they were originally designed for his own reference only.

This is an atom: 
There had been a constant and an urgent demand for a life or memoir of
Mr. Hawthorne; yet, from the extreme delicacy and difficulty of the
subject, the Editor felt obliged to refuse compliance with this demand.
Moreover, Mr. Hawthorne had frequently and emphatically expressed the
hope that no one would attempt to write his Biography; and the Editor
perceived that it would be impossible for any person, outside of his own
domestic circle, to succeed in doing it, on account of his extreme
reserve.  But it was ungracious to do nothing, and therefore the Editor,
believing that Mr. Hawthorne himself was alone capable of satisfactorily
answering the affectionate call for some sketch of his life, concluded to
publish as much as possible of his private records, and even extracts
from his private letters, in order to gratify the desire of his friends
and of literary artists to become more intimately acquainted with him.
The Editor has been severely blamed and wondered at, in some instances,
for allowing many things now published to see the light; but it has been
a matter both of conscience and courtesy to withhold nothing that could
be given up.  Many of the journals were doubtless destroyed; for the
earliest date found in his American papers was that of 1835.

This is an atom: 
The Editor has transcribed the manuscripts just as they were left,
without making any new arrangement or altering any sequence,--merely
omitting some passages, and being especially careful to preserve whatever
could throw any light upon his character.  To persons on a quest for
characteristics, however, each of his books reveals a great many, and it
is believed that with the aid of the Notes (both American and English)
the Tales and Romances will make out a very complete and true picture of
his individuality; and the Notes are often an open sesame to the artistic
works.

This is an atom: 
Several thickly written pages of observations--fine and accurate
etchings--have been omitted, sometimes because too personal with regard
to himself or others, and sometimes because they were afterwards absorbed
into one or another of the Romances or papers in Our Old Home.  It seemed
a pity not to give these original cartoons fresh from his mind, because
they are so carefully finished at the first stroke.  Yet, as Mr.
Hawthorne chose his own way of presenting them to the public, it was
thought better not to exhibit what he himself withheld.  Besides, to any
other than a fellow-artist they might seem mere repetitions.

This is an atom: 
It is very earnestly hoped that these volumes of notes--American,
English, and presently Italian--will dispel an often-expressed opinion
that Mr. Hawthorne was gloomy and morbid.  He had the inevitable
pensiveness and gravity of a person who possessed what a friend of his
called "the awful power of insight"; but his mood was always cheerful and
equal, and his mind peculiarly healthful, and the airy splendor of his
wit and humor was the light of his home.  He saw too far to be
despondent, though his vivid sympathies and shaping imagination often
made him sad in behalf of others.  He also perceived morbidness, wherever
it existed, instantly, as if by the illumination of his own steady cheer;
and he had the plastic power of putting himself into each person's
situation, and of looking from every point of view, which made his
charity most comprehensive.  From this cause he necessarily attracted
confidences, and became confessor to very many sinning and suffering
souls, to whom he gave tender sympathy and help, while resigning judgment
to the Omniscient and All-wise.

This is an atom: 
Throughout his journals it will be seen that Mr. Hawthorne is
entertaining, and not asserting, opinions and ideas.  He questions,
doubts, and reflects with his pen, and, as it were, instructs himself.
So that these Note-Books should be read, not as definitive conclusions of
his mind, but merely as passing impressions often.  Whatever conclusions
be arrived at are condensed in the works given to the world by his own
hand, in which will never be found a careless word.  He was so extremely
scrupulous about the value and effect of every expression that the Editor
has felt great compunction in allowing a single sentence to be printed.
unrevised by himself; but, with the consideration of the above remarks
always kept in mind, these volumes are intrusted to the generous
interpretation of the reader.  If any one must be harshly criticised, it
ought certainly to be the Editor.

This is an atom: 
When a person breaks in, unannounced, upon the morning hours of an
artist, and finds him not in full dress, the intruder, and not the
surprised artist, is doubtless at fault.         S.  H.

This is an atom: 
Dresden, April, 1870.

This is an atom: 
PASSAGES FROM HAWTHORNE'S ENGLISH NOTE-BOOKS

This is an atom: 
Liverpool, August 4th, 1853.--A month lacking two days since we left
America,--a fortnight and some odd days since we arrived in England.  I
began my services, such as they are, on Monday last, August 1st, and here
I sit in my private room at the Consulate, while the Vice-Consul and
clerk are carrying on affairs in the outer office.

This is an atom: 
The pleasantest incident of the morning is when Mr. Pearce (the
Vice-Consul) makes his appearance with the account-books, containing the
receipts and expenditures of the preceding day, and deposits on my desk a
little rouleau of the Queen's coin, wrapped up in a piece of paper.  This
morning there were eight sovereigns, four half-crowns, and a shilling,--a
pretty fair day's work, though not more than the average ought to be.
This forenoon, thus far, I have had two calls, not of business,--one from
an American captain and his son, another from Mr. H----  B----, whom I
met in America, and who has showed us great attention here.  He has
arranged for us to go to the theatre with some of his family this
evening.

This is an atom: 
Since I have been in Liverpool we have hardly had a day, until yesterday,
without more or less of rain, and so cold and shivery that life was
miserable.  I am not warm enough even now, but am gradually getting
acclimated in that respect.

This is an atom: 
Just now I have been fooled out of half a crown by a young woman, who
represents herself as an American and destitute, having come over to see
an uncle whom she found dead, and she has no means of getting back again.
Her accent is not that of an American, and her appearance is not
particularly prepossessing, though not decidedly otherwise.  She is
decently dressed and modest in deportment, but I do not quite trust her
face.  She has been separated from her husband, as I understand her, by
course of law, has had two children, both now dead.  What she wants is to
get back to America, and perhaps arrangements may be made with some
shipmaster to take her as stewardess or in some subordinate capacity.  My
judgment, on the whole, is that she is an English woman, married to and
separated from an American husband,--of no very decided virtue.  I might
as well have kept my half-crown, and yet I might have bestowed it worse.
She is very decent in manner, cheerful, at least not despondent.

This is an atom: 
At two o'clock I went over to the Royal Rock Hotel, about fifteen or
twenty minutes' steaming from this side of the river.  We are going there
on Saturday to reside for a while.  Returning, I found that, Mr. B., from
the American Chamber of Commerce, had called to arrange the time and
place of a visit to the Consul from a delegation of that body.  Settled
for to-morrow at quarter past one at Mr. Blodgett's.

This is an atom: 
August 5th.--An invitation this morning from the Mayor to dine at the
Town Hall on Friday next.  Heaven knows I had rather dine at the humblest
inn in the city, inasmuch as a speech will doubtless be expected from me.
However, things must be as they may.

This is an atom: 
At a quarter past one I was duly on hand at Mr. Blodgett's to receive the
deputation from the Chamber of Commerce.  They arrived pretty seasonably,
in two or three carriages, and were ushered into the drawing-room,--seven
or eight gentlemen, some of whom I had met before.  Hereupon ensued a
speech from Mr. B., the Chairman of the delegation, short and sweet,
alluding to my literary reputation and other laudatory matters, and
occupying only a minute or two.  The speaker was rather embarrassed,
which encouraged me a little, and yet I felt more diffidence on this
occasion than in my effort at Mr. Crittenden's lunch, where, indeed, I
was perfectly self-possessed.  But here, there being less formality, and
more of a conversational character in what was said, my usual diffidence
could not so well be kept in abeyance.  However, I did not break down to
an intolerable extent, and, winding up my eloquence as briefly as
possible, we had a social talk.  Their whole stay could not have been
much more than a quarter of an hour.

This is an atom: 
A call, this morning, at the Consulate, from Dr. Bowrug, who is British
minister, or something of the kind, in China, and now absent on a
twelvemonth's leave.  The Doctor is a brisk person, with the address of a
man of the world,--free, quick to smile, and of agreeable manners.  He
has a good face, rather American than English in aspect, and does not
look much above fifty, though he says he is between sixty and seventy.  I
should take him rather for an active lawyer or a man of business than for
a scholar and a literary man.  He talked in a lively way for ten or
fifteen minutes, and then took his leave, offering me any service in his
power in London,--as, for instance, to introduce me to the Athenaeum
Club.

This is an atom: 
August 8th.--Day before yesterday I escorted my family to Rock Ferry, two
miles either up or down the Mersey (and I really don't know which) by
steamer, which runs every half-hour.  There are steamers going
continually to Birkenhead and other landings, and almost always a great
many passengers on the transit.  At this time the boat was crowded so as
to afford scanty standing-room; it being Saturday, and therefore a kind
of gala-day.  I think I have never seen a populace before coming to
England; but this crowd afforded a specimen of one, both male and female.
The women were the most remarkable; though they seemed not disreputable,
there was in them a coarseness, a freedom, an--I don't know what, that
was purely English.  In fact, men and women here do things that would at
least make them ridiculous in America.  They are not afraid to enjoy
themselves in their own way, and have no pseudo-gentility to support.
Some girls danced upon the crowded deck, to the miserable music of a
little fragment of a band which goes up and down the river on each trip
of the boat.  Just before the termination of the voyage a man goes round
with a bugle turned upwards to receive the eleemosynary pence and
half-pence of the passengers.  I gave one of them, the other day, a
silver fourpence, which fell into the vitals of the instrument, and
compelled the man to take it to pieces.

This is an atom: 
At Rock Ferry there was a great throng, forming a scene not unlike one of
our muster-days or a Fourth of July, and there were bands of music and
banners, and small processions after them, and a school of charity
children, I believe, enjoying a festival.  And there was a club of
respectable persons, playing at bowls on the bowling-green of the hotel,
and there were children, infants, riding on donkeys at a penny a ride,
while their mothers walked alongside to prevent a fall.  Yesterday, while
we were at dinner, Mr. B. came in his carriage to take us to his
residence, Poulton Hall.  He had invited us to dine; but I misunderstood
him, and thought he only intended to give us a drive.  Poulton Hall is
about three miles from Rock Ferry, the road passing through some pleasant
rural scenery, and one or two villages, with houses standing close
together, and old stone or brick cottages, with thatched roofs, and now
and then a better mansion, apart among trees.  We passed an old church,
with a tower and spire, and, half-way up, a patch of ivy, dark green, and
some yellow wall-flowers, in full bloom, growing out of the crevices of
the stone.  Mr. B. told us that the tower was formerly quite clothed with
ivy from bottom to top, but that it had fallen away for lack of the
nourishment that it used to find in the lime between the stones.  This
old church answered to my Transatlantic fancies of England better than
anything I have yet seen.  Not far from it was the Rectory, behind a deep
grove of ancient trees; and there lives the Rector, enjoying a thousand
pounds a year and his nothing-to-do, while a curate performs the real
duty on a stipend of eighty pounds.

This is an atom: 
We passed through a considerable extent of private road, and finally
drove over a lawn, studded with trees and closely shaven, till we reached
the door of Poulton Hall.  Part of the mansion is three or four hundred
years old; another portion is about a hundred and fifty, and still
another has been built during the present generation.  The house is two
stories high, with a sort of beetle-browed roof in front.  It is not very
striking, and does not look older than many wooden houses which I have
seen in America.  There is a curious stately staircase, with a twisted
balustrade much like that of the old Province House in Boston.  The
drawing-room is a handsome modern apartment, being beautifully painted
and gilded and paper-hung, with a white marble fireplace and rich
furniture, so that the impression is that of newness, not of age.  It is
the same with the dining-room, and all the rest of the interior so far as
I saw it.

This is an atom: 
Mr. B. did not inherit this old hall, nor, indeed, is he the owner, but
only the tenant of it.  He is a merchant of Liverpool, a bachelor, with
two sisters residing with him.  In the entrance-hall, there was a stuffed
fox with glass eyes, which I never should have doubted to be an actual
live fox except for his keeping so quiet; also some grouse and other
game.  Mr. B. seems to be a sportsman, and is setting out this week on an
excursion to Scotland, moor-fowl shooting.

This is an atom: 
While the family and two or three guests went to dinner, we walked out to
see the place.  The gardener, an Irishman, showed us through the garden,
which is large and well cared for.  They certainly get everything from
Nature which she can possibly be persuaded to give them, here in England.
There were peaches and pears growing against the high brick southern
walls,--the trunk and branches of the trees being spread out perfectly
flat against the wall, very much like the skin of a dead animal nailed up
to dry, and not a single branch protruding.  Figs were growing in the
same way.  The brick wall, very probably, was heated within, by means of
pipes, in order to re-enforce the insufficient heat of the sun.  It seems
as if there must be something unreal and unsatisfactory in fruit that
owes its existence to such artificial methods.  Squashes were growing
under glass, poor things!  There were immensely large gooseberries in the
garden; and in this particular berry, the English, I believe, have
decidedly the advantage over ourselves.  The raspberries, too, were large
and good.  I espied one gigantic hog-weed in the garden; and, really, my
heart warmed to it, being strongly reminded of the principal product of
my own garden at Concord.  After viewing the garden sufficiently, the
gardener led us to other parts of the estate, and we had glimpses of a
delightful valley, its sides shady with beautiful trees, and a rich,
grassy meadow at the bottom.  By means of a steam-engine and subterranean
pipes and hydrants, the liquid manure from the barn-yard is distributed
wherever it is wanted over the estate, being spouted in rich showers from
the hydrants.  Under this influence, the meadow at the bottom of the
valley had already been made to produce three crops of grass during the
present season, and would produce another.

This is an atom: 
The lawn around Poulton Hall, like thousands of other lawns in England,
is very beautiful, but requires great care to keep it so, being shorn
every three or four days.  No other country will ever have this charm,
nor the charm of lovely verdure, which almost makes up for the absence of
sunshine.  Without the constant rain and shadow which strikes us as so
dismal, these lawns would be as brown as an autumn leaf.  I have not,
thus far, found any such magnificent trees as I expected.  Mr. B. told me
that three oaks, standing in a row on his lawn, were the largest in the
county.  They were very good trees, to be sure, and perhaps four feet in
diameter near the ground, but with no very noble spread of foliage.  In
Concord there are, if not oaks, yet certainly elms, a great deal more
stately and beautiful.  But, on the whole, this lawn, and the old Hall in
the midst of it, went a good way towards realizing some of my fancies of
English life.

This is an atom: 
By and by a footman, looking very quaint and queer in his livery coat,
drab breeches, and white stockings, came to invite me to the table, where
I found Mr. B. and his sisters and guests sitting at the fruit and wine.
There were port, sherry, madeira, and one bottle of claret, all very
good; but they take here much heavier wines than we drink now in America.
After a tolerably long session we went to the tea-room, where I drank
some coffee, and at about the edge of dusk the carriage drew up to the
door to take us home.  Mr. B. and his sisters have shown us genuine
kindness, and they gave us a hearty invitation to come and ramble over
the house whenever we pleased, during their absence in Scotland.  They
say that there are many legends and ghost-stories connected with the
house; and there is an attic chamber, with a skylight, which is called
the Martyr's chamber, from the fact of its having, in old times, been
tenanted by a lady, who was imprisoned there, and persecuted to death for
her religion.  There is an old black-letter library, but the room
containing it is shut, barred, and padlocked,--the owner of the house
refusing to let it be opened, lest some of the books should be stolen.
Meanwhile the rats are devouring them, and the damps destroying them.

This is an atom: 
August 9th.--A pretty comfortable day, as to warmth, and I believe there
is sunshine overhead; but a sea-cloud, composed of fog and coal-smoke,
envelops Liverpool.  At Rock Ferry, when I left it at half past nine,
there was promise of a cheerful day.  A good many gentlemen (or, rather,
respectable business people) came in the boat, and it is not unpleasant,
on these fine mornings, to take the breezy atmosphere of the river.  The
huge steamer Great Britain, bound for Australia, lies right off the Rock
Ferry landing; and at a little distance are two old hulks of ships of
war, dismantled, roofed over, and anchored in the river, formerly for
quarantine purposes, but now used chiefly or solely as homes for old
seamen, whose light labor it is to take care of these condemned ships.
There are a great many steamers plying up and down the river to various
landings in the vicinity; and a good many steam-tugs; also, many boats,
most of which have dark-red or tan-colored sails, being oiled to resist
the wet; also, here and there, a yacht or pleasure-boat, and a few ships
riding stately at their anchors, probably on the point of sailing.  The
river, however, is by no means crowded; because the immense multitude of
ships are ensconced in the docks, where their masts make an intricate
forest for miles up and down the Liverpool shore.  The small black
steamers, whizzing industriously along, many of them crowded with
passengers, snake up the chief life of the scene.  The Mersey has the
color of a mud-puddle, and no atmospheric effect, as far as I have seen,
ever gives it a more agreeable tinge.

This is an atom: 
Visitors to-day, thus far, have been H. A. B., with whom I have arranged
to dine with us at Rock Ferry, and then he is to take us on board the
Great Britain, of which his father is owner (in great part).  Secondly,
Monsieur H., the French Consul, who can speak hardly any English, and who
was more powerfully scented with cigar-smoke than any man I ever
encountered; a polite, gray-haired, red-nosed gentleman, very courteous
and formal.  Heaven keep him from me!  At one o'clock, or thereabouts, I
walked into the city, down through Lord Street, Church Street, and back
to the Consulate through various untraceable crookednesses.  Coming to
Chapel Street, I crossed the graveyard of the old Church of St. Nicholas.
This is, I suppose, the oldest sacred site in Liverpool, a church having
stood here ever since the Conquest, though, probably, there is little or
nothing of the old edifice in the present one, either the whole of the
edifice or else the steeple, being thereto shaken by a chime of bells,--
perhaps both, at different times,--has tumbled down; but the present
church is what we Americans should call venerable.  When the first church
was built, and long afterwards, it must have stood on the grassy verge of
the Mersey; but now there are pavements and warehouses, and the thronged
Prince's and George's Docks, between it and the river; and all around it
is the very busiest bustle of commerce, rumbling wheels, hurrying men,
porter-shops, everything that pertains to the grossest and most practical
life.  And, notwithstanding, there is the broad churchyard extending on
three sides of it, just as it used to be a thousand years ago.  It is
absolutely paved from border to border with flat tombstones, on a level
with the soil and with each other, so that it is one floor of stone over
the whole space, with grass here and there sprouting between the
crevices.  All these stones, no doubt, formerly had inscriptions; but as
many people continually pass, in various directions, across the
churchyard, and as the tombstones are not of a very hard material, the
records on many of them are effaced.  I saw none very old.  A quarter of
a century is sufficient to obliterate the letters, and make all smooth,
where the direct pathway from gate to gate lies over the stones.  The
climate and casual footsteps rub out any inscription in less than a
hundred years.  Some of the monuments are cracked.  On many is merely cut
"The burial place of" so and so; on others there is a long list of
half-readable names; on some few a laudatory epitaph, out of which,
however, it were far too tedious to pick the meaning.  But it really is
interesting and suggestive to think of this old church, first built when
Liverpool was a small village, and remaining, with its successive dead of
ten centuries around it, now that the greatest commercial city in the
world has its busiest centre there.  I suppose people still continue to
be buried in the cemetery.  The greatest upholders of burials in cities
are those whose progenitors have been deposited around or within the city
churches.  If this spacious churchyard stood in a similar position in one
of our American cities, I rather suspect that long ere now it would have
run the risk of being laid out in building-lots, and covered with
warehouses; even if the church itself escaped,--but it would not escape
longer than till its disrepair afforded excuse for tearing it down.  And
why should it, when its purposes might be better served in another spot?

This is an atom: 
We went on board the Great Britain before dinner, between five and six
o'clock,--a great structure, as to convenient arrangement and adaptation,
but giving me a strong impression of the tedium and misery of the long
voyage to Australia.  By way of amusement, she takes over fifty pounds'
worth of playing-cards, at two shillings per pack, for the use of
passengers; also, a small, well-selected library.  After a considerable
time spent on board, we returned to the hotel and dined, and Mr. B. took
his leave at nine o'clock.

This is an atom: 
August 10th.--I left Rock Ferry for the city at half past nine.  In the
boat which arrived thence, there were several men and women with baskets
on their heads, for this is a favorite way of carrying burdens; and they
trudge onward beneath them, without any apparent fear of an overturn, and
seldom putting up a hand to steady them.  One woman, this morning, had a
heavy load of crockery; another, an immense basket of turnips, freshly
gathered, that seemed to me as much as a man could well carry on his
back.  These must be a stiff-necked people.  The women step sturdily and
freely, and with not ungraceful strength.  The trip over to town was
pleasant, it being a fair morning, only with a low-hanging fog.  Had it
been in America, I should have anticipated a day of burning heat.

This is an atom: 
Visitors this morning.  Mr. Ogden of Chicago, or somewhere in the Western
States, who arrived in England a fortnight ago, and who called on me at
that time.  He has since been in Scotland, and is now going to London and
the Continent; secondly, the Captain of the Collins steamer Pacific,
which sails to-day; thirdly, an American shipmaster, who complained that
he had never, in his heretofore voyages, been able to get sight of the
American Consul.

This is an atom: 
Mr. Pearce's customary matutinal visit was unusually agreeable to-day,
inasmuch as he laid on my desk nineteen golden sovereigns and thirteen
shillings.  It being the day of the steamer's departure, an unusual
number of invoice certificates had been required,--my signature to each
of which brings me two dollars.

This is an atom: 
The autograph of a living author has seldom been so much in request at so
respectable a price.  Colonel Crittenden told me that he had received as
much as fifty pounds on a single day.  Heaven prosper the trade between
America and Liverpool!

This is an atom: 
August 15th.--Many scenes which I should have liked to record have
occurred; but the pressure of business has prevented me from recording
them from day to day.

This is an atom: 
On Thursday I went, on invitation from Mr. B., to the prodigious steamer
Great Britain, down the harbor, and some miles into the sea, to escort
her off a little way on her voyage to Australia.  There is an immense
enthusiasm among the English people about this ship, on account of its
being the largest in the world.  The shores were lined with people to see
her sail, and there were innumerable small steamers, crowded with men,
all the way out into the ocean.  Nothing seems to touch the English
nearer than this question of nautical superiority; and if we wish to hit
them to the quick, we must hit them there.

This is an atom: 
On Friday, at 7 P.M., I went to dine with the Mayor.  It was a dinner
given to the Judges and the Grand Jury.  The Judges of England, during
the time of holding an Assize, are the persons first in rank in the
kingdom.  They take precedence of everybody else,--of the highest
military officers, of the Lord Lieutenants, of the Archbishops,--of the
Prince of Wales,--of all except the Sovereign, whose authority and
dignity they represent.  In case of a royal dinner, the Judge would lead
the Queen to the table.

This is an atom: 
The dinner was at the Town Hall, and the rooms and the whole affair were
all in the most splendid style.  Nothing struck me more than the footmen
in the city livery.  They really looked more magnificent in their
gold-lace and breeches and white silk stockings than any officers of
state.  The rooms were beautiful; gorgeously painted and gilded,
gorgeously lighted, gorgeously hung with paintings,--the plate was
gorgeous, and the dinner gorgeous in the English fashion.

This is an atom: 
After the removal of the cloth the Mayor gave various toasts, prefacing
each with some remarks,--the first, of course, the Sovereign, after which
"God save the Queen" was sung, the company standing up and joining in the
chorus, their ample faces glowing with wine, enthusiasm, and loyalty.
Afterwards the Bar, and various other dignities and institutions were
toasted; and by and by came the toast to the United States, and to me, as
their Representative.  Hereupon either "Hail Columbia," or "Yankee
Doodle," or some other of our national tunes (but Heaven knows which),
was played; and at the conclusion, being at bay, and with no alternative,
I got upon my legs, and made a response.  They received me and listened
to my nonsense with a good deal of rapping, and my speech seemed to give
great satisfaction; my chief difficulty being in not knowing how to pitch
my voice to the size of the room.  As for the matter, it is not of the
slightest consequence.  Anybody may make an after-dinner speech who will
be content to talk onward without saying anything.  My speech was not
more than two or three inches long; and, considering that I did not know
a soul there, except the Mayor himself, and that I am wholly unpractised
in all sorts of oratory, and that I had nothing to say, it was quite
successful.  I hardly thought it was in me, but, being once started, I
felt no embarrassment, and went through it as coolly as if I were going
to be hanged.

This is an atom: 
Yesterday, after dinner, I took a walk with my family.  We went through
by-ways and private roads, and saw more of rural England, with its
hedge-rows, its grassy fields, and its whitewashed old stone cottages,
than we have before seen since our arrival.

This is an atom: 
August 20th.--This being Saturday, there early commenced a throng of
visitants to Rock Ferry.  The boat in which I came over brought from the
city a multitude of factory-people.  They had bands of music, and banners
inscribed with the names of the mills they belong to, and other devices:
pale-looking people, but not looking exactly as if they were underfed.
They are brought on reduced terms by the railways and steamers, and come
from great distances in the interior.  These, I believe, were from
Preston.  I have not yet had an opportunity of observing how they amuse
themselves during these excursions.

This is an atom: 
At the dock, the other day, the steamer arrived from Rock Ferry with a
countless multitude of little girls, in coarse blue gowns, who, as they
landed, formed in procession, and walked up the dock.  These girls had
been taken from the workhouses and educated at a charity-school, and
would by and by be apprenticed as servants.  I should not have conceived
it possible that so many children could have been collected together,
without a single trace of beauty or scarcely of intelligence in so much
as one individual; such mean, coarse, vulgar features and figures
betraying unmistakably a low origin, and ignorant and brutal parents.
They did not appear wicked, but only stupid, animal, and soulless.  It
must require many generations of better life to wake the soul in them.
All America could not show the like.

This is an atom: 
August 22d.--A Captain Auld, an American, having died here yesterday, I
went with my clerk and an American shipmaster to take the inventory of
his effects.  His boarding-house was in a mean street, an old dingy
house, with narrow entrance,--the class of boarding-house frequented by
mates of vessels, and inferior to those generally patronized by masters.
A fat elderly landlady, of respectable and honest aspect, and her
daughter, a pleasing young woman enough, received us, and ushered us into
the deceased's bedchamber.  It was a dusky back room, plastered and
painted yellow; its one window looking into the very narrowest of
back-yards or courts, and out on a confused multitude of back buildings,
appertaining to other houses, most of them old, with rude chimneys of
wash-rooms and kitchens, the bricks of which seemed half loose.

This is an atom: 
The chattels of the dead man were contained in two trunks, a chest, a
sail-cloth bag, and a barrel, and consisted of clothing, suggesting a
thickset, middle-sized man; papers relative to ships and business, a
spyglass, a loaded iron pistol, some books of navigation, some charts,
several great pieces of tobacco, and a few cigars; some little plaster
images, that he had probably bought for his children, a cotton umbrella,
and other trumpery of no great value.  In one of the trunks we found
about twenty pounds' worth of English and American gold and silver, and
some notes of hand, due in America.  Of all these things the clerk made
an inventory; after which we took possession of the money and affixed the
consular seal to the trunks, bag, and chest.

This is an atom: 
While this was going on, we heard a great noise of men quarrelling in an
adjoining court; and, altogether, it seemed a squalid and ugly place to
live in, and a most undesirable one to die in.  At the conclusion of our
labors, the young woman asked us if we would not go into another chamber,
and look at the corpse, and appeared to think that we should be rather
glad than otherwise of the privilege.  But, never having seen the man
during his lifetime, I declined to commence his acquaintance now.

This is an atom: 
His bills for board and nursing amount to about the sum which we found in
his trunk; his funeral expenses will be ten pounds more; the surgeon has
sent in a bill of eight pounds, odd shillings; and the account of another
medical man is still to be rendered.  As his executor, I shall pay his
landlady and nurse; and for the rest of the expenses, a subscription must
be made (according to the custom in such cases) among the shipmasters,
headed by myself.  The funeral pomp will consist of a hearse, one coach,
four men, with crape hatbands, and a few other items, together with a
grave at five pounds, over which his friends will be entitled to place a
stone, if they choose to do so, within twelve months.

This is an atom: 
As we left the house, we looked into the dark and squalid dining-room,
where a lunch of cold meat was set out; but having no associations with
the house except through this one dead man, it seemed as if his presence
and attributes pervaded it wholly.  He appears to have been a man of
reprehensible habits, though well advanced in years.  I ought not to
forget a brandy-flask (empty) among his other effects.  The landlady and
daughter made a good impression on me, as honest and respectable persons.

This is an atom: 
August 24th.--Yesterday, in the forenoon, I received a note, and shortly
afterwards a call at the Consulate from Miss H----, whom I apprehend to
be a lady of literary tendencies.  She said that Miss L. had promised her
an introduction, but that, happening to pass through Liverpool, she had
snatched the opportunity to make my acquaintance.  She seems to be a
mature lady, rather plain, but with an honest and intelligent face.  It
was rather a singular freedom, methinks, to come down upon a perfect
stranger in this way,--to sit with him in his private office an hour or
two, and then walk about the streets with him, as she did; for I did the
honors of Liverpool, and showed her the public buildings.  Her talk was
sensible, but not particularly brilliant nor interesting; a good, solid
personage, physically and intellectually.  She is an English woman.

This is an atom: 
In the afternoon, at three o'clock, I attended the funeral of Captain
Auld.  Being ushered into the dining-room of his boarding-house, I found
brandy, gin, and wine set out on a tray, together with some little
spicecakes.  By and by came in a woman, who asked if I were going to the
funeral; and then proceeded to put a mourning-band on my hat,--a
black-silk band, covering the whole hat, and streaming nearly a yard
behind.  After waiting the better part of an hour, nobody else appeared,
although several shipmasters had promised to attend.  Hereupon, the
undertaker was anxious to set forth; but the landlady, who was arrayed in
shining black silk, thought it a shame that the poor man should be buried
with such small attendance.  So we waited a little longer, during which
interval I heard the landlady's daughter sobbing and wailing in the
entry; and but for this tender-heartedness there would have been no tears
at all.  Finally we set forth,--the undertaker, a friend of his, and a
young man, perhaps the landlady's son, and myself, in the black-plumed
coach, and the landlady, her daughter, and a female friend, in the coach
behind.  Previous to this, however, everybody had taken some wine or
spirits; for it seemed to be considered disrespectful not to do so.

This is an atom: 
Before us went the plumed hearse, a stately affair, with a bas-relief of
funereal figures upon its sides.  We proceeded quite across the city to
the Necropolis, where the coffin was carried into a chapel, in which we
found already another coffin, and another set of mourners, awaiting the
clergyman.  Anon he appeared,--a stern, broad-framed, large, and
bald-headed man, in a black-silk gown.  He mounted his desk, and read the
service in quite a feeble and unimpressive way, though with no lack of
solemnity.  This done, our four bearers took up the coffin, and carried
it out of the chapel; but, descending the steps, and, perhaps, having
taken a little too much brandy, one of them stumbled, and down came the
coffin,--not quite to the ground, however; for they grappled with it, and
contrived, with a great struggle, to prevent the misadventure.  But I
really expected to see poor Captain Auld burst forth among us in his
grave-clothes.

This is an atom: 
The Necropolis is quite a handsome burial-place, shut in by high walls,
so overrun with shrubbery that no part of the brick or stone is visible.
Part of the space within is an ornamental garden, with flowers and green
turf; the rest is strewn with flat gravestones, and a few raised
monuments; and straight avenues run to and fro between.  Captain Auld's
grave was dug nine feet deep.  It is his own for twelve months; but, if
his friends do not choose to give him a stone, it will become a common
grave at the end of that time; and four or five more bodies may then be
piled upon his.  Every one seemed greatly to admire the grave; the
undertaker praised it, and also the dryness of its site, which he took
credit to himself for having chosen.  The grave-digger, too, was very
proud of its depth, and the neatness of his handiwork.  The clergyman,
who had marched in advance of us from the chapel, now took his stand at
the head of the grave, and, lifting his hat, proceeded with what remained
of the service, while we stood bareheaded around.  When he came to a
particular part, "ashes to ashes, dust to dust," the undertaker lifted a
handful of earth, and threw it rattling on the coffin,--so did the
landlady's son, and so did I.  After the funeral the undertaker's friend,
an elderly, coarse-looking man, looked round him, and remarked that "the
grass had never grown on the parties who died in the cholera year"; but
at this the undertaker laughed in scorn.

This is an atom: 
As we returned to the gate of the cemetery, the sexton met us, and
pointed to a small office, on entering which we found the clergyman, who
was waiting for his burial-fees.  There was now a dispute between the
clergyman and the undertaker; the former wishing to receive the whole
amount for the gravestone, which the undertaker, of course, refused to
pay.  I explained how the matter stood; on which the clergyman
acquiesced, civilly enough; but it was very strange to see the worldly,
business-like way in which he entered into this squabble, so soon after
burying poor Captain Auld.

This is an atom: 
During our drive back in the mourning-coach, the undertaker, his friend,
and the landlady's son still kept descanting on the excellence of the
grave,--"Such a fine grave,"--"Such a nice grave,"--"Such a splendid
grave,"--and, really, they seemed almost to think it worth while to die,
for the sake of being buried there.  They deemed it an especial pity that
such a grave should ever become a common grave.  "Why," said they to me,
"by paying the extra price you may have it for your own grave, or for
your family!" meaning that we should have a right to pile ourselves over
the defunct Captain.  I wonder how the English ever attain to any
conception of a future existence, since they so overburden themselves
with earth and mortality in their ideas of funerals.  A drive with an
undertaker, in a sable-plumed coach!--talking about graves!--and yet he
was a jolly old fellow, wonderfully corpulent, with a smile breaking out
easily all over his face,--although, once in a while, he looked
professionally lugubrious.

This is an atom: 
All the time the scent of that horrible mourning-coach is in my nostrils,
and I breathe nothing but a funeral atmosphere.

This is an atom: 
Saturday, August 27th.--This being the gala-day of the manufacturing
people about Liverpool, the steamboats to Rock Ferry were seasonably
crowded with large parties of both sexes.  They were accompanied with two
bands of music, in uniform; and these bands, before I left the hotel,
were playing, in competition and rivalry with each other in the
coach-yard, loud martial strains from shining brass instruments.  A prize
is to be assigned to one or to the other of these bands, and I suppose
this was a part of the competition.  Meanwhile the merry-making people
who thronged the courtyard were quaffing coffee from blue earthen mugs,
which they brought with them,--as likewise they brought the coffee, and
had it made in the hotel.

This is an atom: 
It had poured with rain about the time of their arrival, notwithstanding
which they did not seem disheartened; for, of course, in this climate, it
enters into all their calculations to be drenched through and through.
By and by the sun shone out, and it has continued to shine and shade
every ten minutes ever since.  All these people were decently dressed;
the men generally in dark clothes, not so smartly as Americans on a
festal day, but so as not to be greatly different as regards dress.  They
were paler, smaller, less wholesome-looking and less intelligent, and, I
think, less noisy, than so many Yankees would have been.  The women and
girls differed much more from what American girls and women would be on a
pleasure-excursion, being so shabbily dressed, with no kind of smartness,
no silks, nothing but cotton gowns, I believe, and ill-looking bonnets,--
which, however, was the only part of their attire that they seemed to
care about guarding from the rain.  As to their persons, they generally
looked better developed and healthier than the men; but there was a woful
lack of beauty and grace, not a pretty girl among them, all coarse and
vulgar.  Their bodies, it seems to me, are apt to be very long in
proportion to their limbs,--in truth, this kind of make is rather
characteristic of both sexes in England.  The speech of these folks, in
some instances, was so broad Lancashire that I could not well understand
it.

This is an atom: 
A WALK TO BEBBINGTON.

This is an atom: 
Rock Ferry, August 29th.--Yesterday we all took a walk into the country.
It was a fine afternoon, with clouds, of course, in different parts of
the sky, but a clear atmosphere, bright sunshine, and altogether a
Septembrish feeling.  The ramble was very pleasant, along the hedge-lined
roads in which there were flowers blooming, and the varnished holly,
certainly one of the most beautiful shrubs in the world, so far as
foliage goes.  We saw one cottage which I suppose was several hundred
years old.  It was of stone, filled into a wooden frame, the black-oak of
which was visible like an external skeleton; it had a thatched roof, and
was whitewashed.  We passed through a village,--higher Bebbington, I
believe,--with narrow streets and mean houses all of brick or stone, and
not standing wide apart from each other as in American country villages,
but conjoined.  There was an immense almshouse in the midst; at least, I
took it to be so.  In the centre of the village, too, we saw a
moderate-sized brick house, built in imitation of a castle with a tower
and turret, in which an upper and an under row of small cannon were
mounted,--now green with moss.  There were also battlements along the
roof of the house, which looked as if it might have been built eighty or
a hundred years ago.  In the centre of it there was the dial of a clock,
but the inner machinery had been removed, and the hands, hanging
listlessly, moved to and fro in the wind.  It was quite a novel symbol of
decay and neglect.  On the wall, close to the street, there were certain
eccentric inscriptions cut into slabs of stone, but I could make no sense
of them.  At the end of the house opposite the turret, we peeped through
the bars of an iron gate and beheld a little paved court-yard, and at the
farther side of it a small piazza, beneath which seemed to stand the
figure of a man.  He appeared well advanced in years, and was dressed in
a blue coat and buff breeches, with a white or straw hat on his head.
Behold, too, in a kennel beside the porch, a large dog sitting on his
hind legs, chained!  Also, close beside the gateway, another man, seated
in a kind of arbor!  All these were wooden images; and the whole
castellated, small, village-dwelling, with the inscriptions and the queer
statuary, was probably the whim of some half-crazy person, who has now,
no doubt, been long asleep in Bebbington churchyard.

This is an atom: 
The bell of the old church was ringing as we went along, and many
respectable-looking people and cleanly dressed children were moving
towards the sound.  Soon we reached the church, and I have seen nothing
yet in England that so completely answered my idea of what such a thing
was, as this old village church of Bebbington.

This is an atom: 
It is quite a large edifice, built in the form of a cross, a low peaked
porch in the side, over which, rudely cut in stone, is the date 1300 and
something.  The steeple has ivy on it, and looks old, old, old; so does
the whole church, though portions of it have been renewed, but not so as
to impair the aspect of heavy, substantial endurance, and long, long
decay, which may go on hundreds of years longer before the church is a
ruin.  There it stands, among the surrounding graves, looking just the
same as it did in Bloody Mary's days; just as it did in Cromwell's time.
A bird (and perhaps many birds) had its nest in the steeple, and flew in
and out of the loopholes that were opened into it.  The stone framework
of the windows looked particularly old.

This is an atom: 
There were monuments about the church, some lying flat on the ground,
others elevated on low pillars, or on cross slabs of stone, and almost
all looking dark, moss-grown, and very antique.  But on reading some of
the inscriptions, I was surprised to find them very recent; for, in fact,
twenty years of this climate suffices to give as much or more antiquity
of aspect, whether to gravestone or edifice, than a hundred years of our
own,--so soon do lichens creep over the surface, so soon does it blacken,
so soon do the edges lose their sharpness, so soon does Time gnaw away
the records.  The only really old monuments (and those not very old) were
two, standing close together, and raised on low rude arches, the dates on
which were 1684 and 1686.  On one a cross was rudely cut into the stone.
But there may have been hundreds older than this, the records on which
had been quite obliterated, and the stones removed, and the graves dug
over anew.  None of the monuments commemorate people of rank; on only one
the buried person was recorded as "Gent."

This is an atom: 
While we sat on  the flat slabs resting ourselves, several little girls,
healthy-looking and prettily dressed enough, came into the churchyard,
and began to talk and laugh, and to skip merrily from one tombstone to
another.  They stared very broadly at us, and one of them, by and by, ran
up to U. and J., and gave each of them a green apple, then they skipped
upon the tombstones again, while, within the church, we heard them
singing, sounding pretty much as I have heard it in our pine-built New
England meeting-houses.  Meantime the rector had detected the voices of
these naughty little girls, and perhaps had caught glimpses of them
through the windows; for, anon, out came the sexton, and, addressing
himself to us, asked whether there had been any noise or disturbance in
the churchyard.  I should not have borne testimony against these little
villagers, but S. was so anxious to exonerate our own children that she
pointed out these poor little sinners to the sexton, who forthwith turned
them out.  He would have done the same to us, no doubt, had my coat been
worse than it was; but, as the matter stood, his demeanor was rather
apologetic than menacing, when he informed us that the rector had sent
him.

This is an atom: 
We stayed a little longer, looking at the graves, some of which were
between the buttresses of the church and quite close to the wall, as if
the sleepers anticipated greater comfort and security the nearer they
could get to the sacred edifice.

This is an atom: 
As we went out of the churchyard, we passed the aforesaid little girls,
who were sitting behind the mound of a tomb, and busily babbling
together.  They called after us, expressing their discontent that we had
betrayed them to the sexton, and saying that it was not they who made the
noise.  Going homeward, we went astray in a green lane, that terminated
in the midst of a field, without outlet, so that we had to retrace a good
many of our footsteps.

This is an atom: 
Close to the wall of the church, beside the door, there was an ancient
baptismal font of stone.  In fact, it was a pile of roughly hewn stone
steps, five or six feet high, with a block of stone at the summit, in
which was a hollow about as big as a wash-bowl.  It was full of
rainwater.

This is an atom: 
The church seems to be St. Andrew's Church, Lower Bebbington, built in
1100.

This is an atom: 
September 1st.--To-day we leave the Rock Ferry Hotel, where we have spent
nearly four weeks.  It is a comfortable place, and we have had a good
table and have been kindly treated.  We occupied a large parlor,
extending through the whole breadth of the house, with a bow-window,
looking towards Liverpool, and adown the intervening river, and to
Birkenhead, on the hither side.  The river would be a pleasanter object,
if it were blue and transparent, instead of such a mud-puddly hue; also,
if it were always full to its brine; whereas it generally presents a
margin, and sometimes a very broad one, of glistening mud, with here and
there a small vessel aground on it.

This is an atom: 
Nevertheless, the parlor-window has given us a pretty good idea of the
nautical business of Liverpool; the constant objects being the little
black steamers puffing unquietly along, sometimes to our own ferry,
sometimes beyond it to Eastham, and sometimes towing a long string of
boats from Runcorn or otherwhere up the river, laden with goods, and
sometimes gallanting a tall ship in or out.  Some of these ships lie for
days together in the river, very majestic and stately objects, often with
the flag of the stars and stripes waving over them.  Now and then, after
a gale at sea, a vessel comes in with her masts broken short off in the
midst, and with marks of rough handling about the hull.  Once a week
comes a Cunard steamer, with its red funnel pipe whitened by the salt
spray; and, firing off cannon to announce her arrival, she moors to a
large iron buoy in the middle of the river, and a few hundred yards from
the stone pier of our ferry.  Immediately comes poring towards her a
little mail-steamer, to take away her mail-bags and such of the
passengers as choose to land; and for several hours afterwards the Cunard
lies with the smoke and steam coming out of her, as if she were smoking
her pipe after her toilsome passage across the Atlantic.  Once a
fortnight comes an American steamer of the Collins line; and then the
Cunard salutes her with cannon, to which the Collins responds, and moors
herself to another iron buoy, not far from the Cunard.  When they go to
sea, it is with similar salutes; the two vessels paying each other the
more ceremonious respect, because they are inimical and jealous of each
other.

This is an atom: 
Besides these, there are other steamers of all sorts and sizes, for
pleasure-excursions, for regular trips to Dublin, the Isle of Man, and
elsewhither; and vessels which are stationary, as floating lights, but
which seem to relieve one another at intervals; and small vessels, with
sails looking as if made of tanned leather; and schooners, and yachts,
and all manner of odd-looking craft, but none so odd as the Chinese junk.
This junk lies by our own pier, and looks as if it were copied from some
picture on an old teacup.  Beyond all these objects we see the other side
of the Mersey, with the delectably green fields opposite to us, while the
shore becomes more and more thickly populated, until about two miles off
we see the dense centre of the city, with the dome of the Custom House,
and steeples and towers; and, close to the water, the spire of St.
Nicholas; and above, and intermingled with the whole city scene, the
duskiness of the coal-smoke gushing upward.  Along the bank we perceive
the warehouses of the Albert dock, and the Queen's tobacco warehouses,
and other docks, and, nigher to us, a shipyard or two.  In the evening
all this sombre picture gradually darkens out of sight, and in its place
appear only the lights of the city, kindling into a galaxy of earthly
stars, for a long distance, up and down the shore; and, in one or two
spots, the bright red gleam of a furnace, like the "red planet Mars"; and
once in a while a bright, wandering beam gliding along the river, as a
steamer cones or goes between us and Liverpool.

This is an atom: 
ROCK PARK.

This is an atom: 
September 2d.--We got into our new house in Rock Park yesterday.  It is
quite a good house, with three apartments, beside kitchen and pantry on
the lower floor; and it is three stories high, with four good chambers in
each story.  It is a stone edifice, like almost all the English houses,
and handsome in its design.  The rent, without furniture, would probably
have been one hundred pounds; furnished, it is one hundred and sixty
pounds.  Rock Park, as the locality is called, is private property, and
is now nearly covered with residences for professional people, merchants,
and others of the upper middling class; the houses being mostly built, I
suppose, on speculation, and let to those who occupy them.  It is the
quietest place imaginable, there being a police station at the entrance,
and the officer on duty allows no ragged or ill-looking person to pass.
There being a toll, it precludes all unnecessary passage of carriages;
and never were there more noiseless streets than those that give access
to these pretty residences.  On either side there is thick shrubbery,
with glimpses through it of the ornamented portals, or into the trim
gardens with smooth-shaven lawns, of no large extent, but still affording
reasonable breathing-space.  They are really an improvement on anything,
save what the very rich can enjoy, in America.  The former occupants of
our house (Mrs. Campbell and family) having been fond of flowers, there
are many rare varieties in the garden, and we are told that there is
scarcely a month in the year when a flower will not be found there.

This is an atom: 
The house is respectably, though not very elegantly, furnished.  It was a
dismal, rainy day yesterday, and we had a coal-fire in the sitting-room,
beside which I sat last evening as twilight came on, and thought, rather
sadly, how many times we have changed our home since we were married.  In
the first place, our three years at the Old Manse; then a brief residence
at Salem, then at Boston, then two or three years at Salem again; then at
Lenox, then at West Newton, and then again at Concord, where we imagined
that we were fixed for life, but spent only a year.  Then this farther
flight to England, where we expect to spend four years, and afterwards
another year or two in Italy, during all which time we shall have no real
home.  For, as I sat in this English house, with the chill, rainy English
twilight brooding over the lawn, and a coal-fire to keep me comfortable
on the first evening of September, and the picture of a stranger--the
dead husband of Mrs. Campbell--gazing down at me from above the
mantel-piece,--I felt that I never should be quite at home here.
Nevertheless, the fire was very comfortable to look at, and the shape of
the fireplace--an arch, with a deep cavity--was an improvement on the
square, shallow opening of an American coal-grate.

This is an atom: 
September 7th.--It appears by the annals of Liverpool, contained in
Gore's Directory, that in 1076 there was a baronial castle built by Roger
de Poictiers on the site of the present St. George's Church.  It was
taken down in 1721.  The church now stands at one of the busiest points
of the principal street of the city.  The old Church of St. Nicholas,
founded about the time of the Conquest, and more recently rebuilt, stood
within a quarter of a mile of the castle.

This is an atom: 
In 1150, Birkenhead Priory was founded on the Cheshire side of the
Mersey.  The monks used to ferry passengers across to Liverpool until
1282, when Woodside Ferry was established,--twopence for a horseman, and
a farthing for a foot-passenger.  Steam ferry-boats now cross to
Birkenhead, Monk's Ferry, and Woodside every ten minutes; and I believe
there are large hotels at all these places, and many of the business men
of Liverpool have residences in them.

This is an atom: 
In 1252 a tower was built by Sir John Stanley, which continued to be a
castle of defence to the Stanley family for many hundred years, and was
not finally taken down till 1820, when its site had become the present
Water Street, in the densest commercial centre of the city.

This is an atom: 
There appear to have been other baronial castles and residences in
different parts of the city, as a hall in old Hall Street, built by Sir
John de la More, on the site of which a counting-house now stands.  This
knightly family of De la More sometimes supplied mayors to the city, as
did the family of the Earls of Derby.

This is an atom: 
About 1582, Edward, Earl of Derby, maintained two hundred and fifty
citizens of Liverpool, fed sixty aged persons twice a day, and provided
twenty-seven hundred persons with meat, drink, and money every Good
Friday.

This is an atom: 
In 1644, Prince Rupert besieged the town for twenty-four days, and
finally took it by storm.  This was June 26th, and the Parliamentarians,
under Sir John Meldrum, repossessed it the following October.

This is an atom: 
In 1669 the Mayor of Liverpool kept an inn.

This is an atom: 
In 1730 there was only one carriage in town, and no stage-coach came
nearer than Warrington, the roads being impassable.

This is an atom: 
In 1734 the Earl of Derby gave a great entertainment in the tower.

This is an atom: 
In 1737 the Mayor was George Norton, a saddler, who frequently took, the
chair with his leather apron on.  His immediate predecessor seems to have
been the Earl of Derby, who gave the above-mentioned entertainment during
his mayoralty.  Where George's Dock now is, there used to be a battery of
fourteen eighteen-pounders for the defence of the town, and the old sport
of bull-baiting was carried on in that vicinity, close to the Church of
St. Nicholas.

This is an atom: 
September 12th.--On Saturday a young man was found wandering about in
West Derby, a suburb of Liverpool, in a state of insanity, and, being
taken before a magistrate, he proved to be an American.  As he seemed to
be in a respectable station of life, the magistrate sent the master of
the workhouse to me, in order to find out whether I would take the
responsibility of his expenses, rather than have him put in the
workhouse.  My clerk went to investigate the matter, and brought me his
papers.  His name proves to be ---- ------, belonging to ------,
twenty-five years of age.  One of the papers was a passport from our
legation in Naples; likewise there was a power of attorney from his
mother (who seems to have been married a second time) to dispose of some
property of hers abroad; a hotel bill, also, of some length, in which
were various charges for wine; and, among other evidences of low funds, a
pawnbroker's receipt for a watch, which he had pledged at five pounds.
There was also a ticket for his passage to America, by the screw steamer
Andes, which sailed on Wednesday last.  The clerk found him to the last
degree incommunicative; and nothing could be discovered from him but what
the papers disclosed.  There were about a dozen utterly unintelligible
notes among the papers, written by himself since his derangement.

This is an atom: 
I decided to put him into the insane hospital, where he now accordingly
is, and to-morrow (by which time he may be in a more conversable mood) I
mean to pay him a visit.

This is an atom: 
The clerk tells me that there is now, and has been for three years, an
American lady in the Liverpool almshouse, in a state of insanity.  She is
very accomplished, especially in music; but in all this time it has been
impossible to find out who she is, or anything about her connections or
previous life.  She calls herself Jenny Lind, and as for any other name
or identity she keeps her own secret.

This is an atom: 
September 14th.--It appears that Mr. ------ (the insane young gentleman)
being unable to pay his bill at the inn where he was latterly staying,
the landlord had taken possession of his luggage, and satisfied himself
in that way.  My clerk, at my request, has taken his watch out of pawn.
It proves to be not a very good one, though doubtless worth more than
five pounds, for which it was pledged.  The Governor of the Lunatic
Asylum wrote me yesterday, stating that the patient was in want of a
change of clothes, and that, according to his own account, he had left
his luggage at the American Hotel.  After office-hours, I took a cab, and
set out with my clerk, to pay a visit to the Asylum, taking the American
Hotel in our way.

This is an atom: 
The American Hotel is a small house, not at all such a one as American
travellers of any pretension would think of stopping at, but still very
respectable, cleanly, and with a neat sitting-room, where the guests
might assemble, after the American fashion.  We asked for the landlady,
and anon down she came, a round, rosy, comfortable-looking English dame
of fifty or thereabouts.  On being asked whether she knew a Mr. ------,
she readily responded that he had been there, but, had left no luggage,
having taken it away before paying his bill; and that she had suspected
him of meaning to take his departure without paying her at all.  Hereupon
she had traced him to the hotel before mentioned, where she had found
that he had stayed two nights,--but was then, I think, gone from thence.
Afterwards she encountered him again, and, demanding her due, went with
him to a pawnbroker's, where he pledged his watch and paid her.  This was
about the extent of the landlady's knowledge of the matter.  I liked the
woman very well, with her shrewd, good-humored, worldly, kindly
disposition.

This is an atom: 
Then we proceeded to the Lunatic Asylum, to which we were admitted by a
porter at the gate.  Within doors we found some neat and comely
servant-women, one of whom showed us into a handsome parlor, and took my
card to the Governor.  There was a large bookcase, with a glass front,
containing handsomely bound books, many of which, I observed, were of a
religious character.  In a few minutes the Governor came in, a
middle-aged man, tall, and thin for an Englishman, kindly and agreeable
enough in aspect, but not with the marked look of a man of force and
ability.  I should not judge from his conversation that he was an
educated man, or that he had any scientific acquaintance with the subject
of insanity.

This is an atom: 
He said that Mr. ------ was still quite incommunicative, and not in a
very promising state; that I had perhaps better defer seeing him for a
few days; that it would not be safe, at present, to send him home to
America without an attendant, and this was about all.  But on returning
home I learned from my wife, who had had a call from Mrs. Blodgett, that
Mrs. Blodgett knew Mr. ------ and his mother, who has recently been
remarried to a young husband, and is now somewhere in Italy.  They seemed
to have boarded at Mrs. Blodgett's house on their way to the Continent,
and within a week or two, an acquaintance and pastor of Mr. ------, the
Rev. Dr. ------, has sailed for America.  If I could only have caught
him, I could have transferred the care, expense, and responsibility of
the patient to him.  The Governor of the Asylum mentioned, by the way,
that Mr. ------ describes himself as having been formerly a midshipman in
the navy.

This is an atom: 
I walked through the St. James's cemetery yesterday.  It is a very pretty
place, dug out of the rock, having formerly, I believe, been a
stone-quarry.  It is now a deep and spacious valley, with graves and
monuments on its level and grassy floor, through which run gravel-paths,
and where grows luxuriant shrubbery.  On one of the steep sides of the
valley, hewn out of the rock, are tombs, rising in tiers, to the height
of fifty feet or more; some of them cut directly into the rock with
arched portals, and others built with stone.  On the other side the bank
is of earth, and rises abruptly, quite covered with trees, and looking
very pleasant with their green shades.  It was a warm and sunny day, and
the cemetery really had a most agreeable aspect.  I saw several
gravestones of Americans; but what struck me most was one line of an
epitaph on an English woman, "Here rests in peace a virtuous wife."  The
statue of Huskisson stands in the midst of the valley, in a kind of
mausoleum, with a door of plate-glass, through which you look at the dead
statesman's effigy.

This is an atom: 
September 22d.--. . . . Some days ago an American captain came to the
office, and said he had shot one of his men, shortly after sailing from
New Orleans, and while the ship was still in the river.  As he described
the event, he was in peril of his life from this man, who was an
Irishman; and he fired his pistol only when the man was coming upon him,
with a knife in one hand, and some other weapon of offence in the other,
while he himself was struggling with one or two more of the crew.  He was
weak at the time, having just recovered from the yellow fever.  The shots
struck the man in the pit of the stomach, and he lived only about a
quarter of an hour.  No magistrate in England has a right to arrest or
examine the captain, unless by a warrant from the Secretary of State, on
the charge of murder.  After his statement to me, the mother of the slain
man went to the police officer, and accused him of killing her son.  Two
or three days since, moreover, two of the sailors came before me, and
gave their account of the matter; and it looked very differently from
that of the captain.  According to them, the man had no idea of attacking
the captain, and was so drunk that he could not keep himself upright
without assistance.  One of these two men was actually holding him up
when the captain fired two barrels of his pistol, one immediately after
the other, and lodged two balls in the pit of his stomach.  The man sank
down at once, saying, "Jack, I am killed,"--and died very shortly.
Meanwhile the captain drove this man away, under threats of shooting him
likewise.  Both the seamen described the captain's conduct, both then and
during the whole voyage, as outrageous, and I do not much doubt that it
was so.  They gave their evidence like men who wished to tell the truth,
and were moved by no more than a natural indignation at the captain's
wrong.

This is an atom: 
I did not much like the captain from the first,--a hard, rough man, with
little education, and nothing of the gentleman about him, a red face and
a loud voice.  He seemed a good deal excited, and talked fast and much
about the event, but yet not as if it had sunk deeply into him.  He
observed that he "would not have had it happen for a thousand dollars,"
that being the amount of detriment which he conceives himself to suffer
by the ineffaceable blood-stain on his hand.  In my opinion it is little
short of murder, if at all; but what would be murder on shore is almost a
natural occurrence when done in such a hell on earth as one of these
ships, in the first hours of the voyage.  The men are then all drunk,--
some of them often in delirium tremens; and the captain feels no safety
for his life except in making himself as terrible as a fiend.  It is the
universal testimony that there is a worse set of sailors in these short
voyages between Liverpool and America than in any other trade whatever.

This is an atom: 
There is no probability that the captain will ever be called to account
for this deed.  He gave, at the time, his own version of the affair in
his log-book; and this was signed by the entire crew, with the exception
of one man, who had hidden himself in the hold in terror of the captain.
His mates will sustain his side of the question; and none of the sailors
would be within reach of the American courts, even should they be sought
for.

This is an atom: 
October 1st.--On Thursday I went with Mr. Ticknor to Chester by railway.
It is quite an indescribable old town, and I feel at last as if I had had
a glimpse of old England.  The wall encloses a large space within the
town, but there are numerous houses and streets not included within its
precincts.  Some of the principal streets pass under the ancient
gateways; and at the side there are flights of steps, giving access to
the summit.  Around the top of the whole wall, a circuit of about two
miles, there runs a walk, well paved with flagstones, and broad enough
for three persons to walk abreast.  On one side--that towards the
country--there is a parapet of red freestone three or four feet high.  On
the other side there are houses, rising up immediately from the wall, so
that they seem a part of it.  The height of it, I suppose, may be thirty
or forty feet, and, in some parts, you look down from the parapet into
orchards, where there are tall apple-trees, and men on the branches,
gathering fruit, and women and children among the grass, filling bags or
baskets.  There are prospects of the surrounding country among the
buildings outside the wall; at one point, a view of the river Dee, with
an old bridge of arches.  It is all very strange, very quaint, very
curious to see how the town has overflowed its barrier, and how, like
many institutions here, the ancient wall still exists, but is turned to
quite another purpose than what it was meant for,--so far as it serves
any purpose at all.  There are three or four towers in the course of the
circuit; the most interesting being one from the top of which King
Charles the First is said to have seen the rout of his army by the
Parliamentarians.  We ascended the short flight of steps that led up into
the tower, where an old man pointed out the site of the battle-field, now
thickly studded with buildings, and told us what we had already learned
from the guide-book.  After this we went into the cathedral, which I will
perhaps describe on some other occasion, when I shall have seen more of
it, and to better advantage.  The cloisters gave us the strongest
impression of antiquity; the stone arches being so worn and blackened by
time.  Still an American must always have imagined a better cathedral
than this.  There were some immense windows of painted glass, but all
modern.  In the chapter-house we found a coal-fire burning in a grate,
and a large heap of old books--the library of the cathedral--in a
discreditable state of decay,--mildewed, rotten, neglected for years.
The sexton told us that they were to be arranged and better ordered.
Over the door, inside, hung two failed and tattered banners, being those
of the Cheshire regiment.

This is an atom: 
The most utterly indescribable feature of Chester is the Rows, which
every traveller has attempted to describe.  At the height of several feet
above some of the oldest streets, a walk runs through the front of the
houses, which project over it.  Back of the walk there are shops; on the
outer side is a space of two or three yards, where the shopmen place
their tables, and stands, and show-cases; overhead, just high enough for
persons to stand erect, a ceiling.  At frequent intervals little narrow
passages go winding in among the houses, which all along are closely
conjoined, and seem to have no access or exit, except through the shops,
or into these narrow passages, where you can touch each side with your
elbows, and the top with your hand.  We penetrated into one or two of
them, and they smelt anciently and disagreeably.  At one of the doors
stood a pale-looking, but cheerful and good-natured woman, who told us
that she had come to that house when first married, twenty-one years
before, and had lived there ever since; and that she felt as if she had
been buried through the best years of her life.  She allowed us to peep
into her kitchen and parlor,--small, dingy, dismal, but yet not wholly
destitute of a home look.  She said that she had seen two or three
coffins in a day, during cholera times, carried out of that narrow
passage into which her door opened.  These avenues put me in mind of
those which run through ant-hills, or those which a mole makes
underground.  This fashion of Rows does not appear to be going out; and,
for aught I can see, it may last hundreds of years longer.  When a house
becomes so old as to be untenantable, it is rebuilt, and the new one is
fashioned like the old, so far as regards the walk running through its
front.  Many of the shops are very good, and even elegant, and these Rows
are the favorite places of business in Chester.  Indeed, they have many
advantages, the passengers being sheltered from the rain, and there being
within the shops that dimmer light by which tradesmen like to exhibit
their wares.

This is an atom: 
A large proportion of the edifices in the Rows must be comparatively
modern; but there are some very ancient ones, with oaken frames visible
on the exterior.  The Row, passing through these houses, is railed with
oak, so old that it has turned black, and grown to be as hard as stone,
which it might be mistaken for, if one did not see where names and
initials have been cut into it with knives at some bygone period.
Overhead, cross-beams project through the ceiling so low as almost to hit
the head.  On the front of one of these buildings was the inscription,
"GOD'S PROVIDENCE IS MINE INHERITANCE," said to have been put there by
the occupant of the house two hundred years ago, when the plague spared
this one house only in the whole city.  Not improbably the inscription
has operated as a safeguard to prevent the demolition of the house
hitherto; but a shopman of an adjacent dwelling told us that it was soon
to be taken down.

This is an atom: 
Here and there, about some of the streets through which the Rows do not
run, we saw houses of very aged aspect, with steep, peaked gables.  The
front gable-end was supported on stone pillars, and the sidewalk passed
beneath.  Most of these old houses seemed to be taverns,--the Black Bear,
the Green Dragon, and such names.  We thought of dining at one of them,
but, on inspection, they looked rather too dingy and close, and of
questionable neatness.  So we went to the Royal Hotel, where we probably
fared just as badly at much more expense, and where there was a
particularly gruff and crabbed old waiter, who, I suppose, thought
himself free to display his surliness because we arrived at the hotel on
foot.  For my part, I love to see John Bull show himself.  I must go
again and again and again to Chester, for I suppose there is not a more
curious place in the world.

This is an atom: 
Mr. Ticknor, who has been staying at Rock Park with us since Tuesday, has
steamed away in the Canada this morning.  His departure seems to make me
feel more abroad, more dissevered from my native country, than before.

This is an atom: 
October 3d.--Saturday evening, at six, I went to dine with Mr. Aiken, a
wealthy merchant here, to meet two of the sons of Burns.  There was a
party of ten or twelve, Mr. Aiken and his two daughters included.  The
two sons of Burns have both been in the Indian army, and have attained
the ranks of Colonel and Major; one having spent thirty, and the other
twenty-seven years in India.  They are now old gentlemen of sixty and
upwards, the elder with a gray head, the younger with a perfectly white
one,--rather under than above the middle stature, and with a British
roundness of figure,--plain, respectable, intelligent-looking persons,
with quiet manners.  I saw no resemblance in either of them to any
portrait of their father.  After the ladies left the table, I sat next to
the Major, the younger of the two, and had a good deal of talk with him.
He seemed a very kindly and social man, and was quite ready to speak
about his father, nor was he at all reluctant to let it be seen how much
he valued the glory of being descended from the poet.  By and by, at Mr.
Aiken's instance, he sang one of Burns's songs,--the one about "Annie"
and the "rigs of barley."  He sings in a perfectly simple style, so that
it is little more than a recitative, and yet the effect is very good as
to humor, sense, and pathos.  After rejoining the ladies, he sang
another, "A posie for my ain dear May," and likewise "A man's a man for
a' that."  My admiration of his father, and partly, perhaps, my being an
American, gained me some favor with him, and he promised to give me what
he considered the best engraving of Burns, and some other remembrance of
him.  The Major is that son of Burns who spent an evening at Abbotsford
with Sir Walter Scott, when, as Lockhart writes, "the children sang the
ballads of their sires."  He spoke with vast indignation of a recent
edition of his father's works by Robert Chambers, in which the latter
appears to have wronged the poet by some misstatements.--I liked them
both and they liked me, and asked me to go and see there at Cheltenham,
where they reside.  We broke up at about midnight.

This is an atom: 
The members of this dinner-party were of the more liberal tone of
thinking here in Liverpool.  The Colonel and Major seemed to be of
similar principles; and the eyes of the latter glowed, when he sang his
father's noble verse, "The rank is but the guinea's stamp," etc.  It
would have been too pitiable if Burns had left a son who could not feel
the spirit of that verse.

This is an atom: 
October 8th.--Coning to my office, two or three mornings ago, I found
Mrs. ------, the mother of Mr. ------, the insane young man of whom I had
taken charge. She is a lady of fifty or thereabouts, and not very
remarkable anyway, nor particularly lady-like.  However, she was just
come off a rapid journey, having travelled from Naples, with three small
children, without taking rest, since my letter reached her.  A son (this
proved to be her new husband) of about twenty had come with her to the
Consulate.  She was, of course, infinitely grieved about the young man's
insanity, and had two or three bursts of tears while we talked the matter
over.  She said he was the hope of her life,--the best, purest, most
innocent child that ever was, and wholly free from every kind of vice.
But it appears that he had a previous attack of insanity, lasting three
months, about three years ago.

This is an atom: 
After I had told her all I knew about him, including my personal
observations at a visit a week or two since, we drove in a cab to the
Asylum.  It must have been a dismal moment to the poor lady, as we
entered the gateway through a tall, prison-like wall.  Being ushered into
the parlor, the Governor soon appeared, and informed us that Mr. ------
had had a relapse within a few days, and was not now so well as when I
saw him.  He complains of unjust confinement, and seems to consider
himself, if I rightly understand, under persecution for political
reasons.  The Governor, however, proposed to call him down, and I took my
leave, feeling that it would be indelicate to be present at his first
interview with his mother.  So here ended my guardianship of the poor
young fellow.

This is an atom: 
In the afternoon I called at the Waterloo Hotel, where Mrs. ------ was
staying, and found her in the coffee-room with the children.  She had
determined to take a lodging in the vicinity of the Asylum, and was going
to remove thither as soon as the children had had something to eat.  They
seemed to be pleasant and well-behaved children, and impressed me more
favorably than the mother, whom I suspect to be rather a foolish woman,
although her present grief makes her appear in a more respectable light
than at other times.  She seemed anxious to impress me with the
respectability and distinction of her connections in America, and I had
observed the same tendency in the insane patient, at my interview with
him.  However, she has undoubtedly a mother's love for this poor
shatterbrain, and this may weigh against the folly of her marrying an
incongruously youthful second husband, and many other follies.

This is an atom: 
This was day before yesterday, and I have heard nothing of her since.
The same day I had applications for assistance in two other domestic
affairs; one from an Irishman, naturalized in America, who wished me to
get him a passage thither, and to take charge of his wife and family
here, at my own private expense, until he could remit funds to carry them
across.  Another was from an Irishman, who had a power of attorney from a
countrywoman of his in America, to find and take charge of an infant whom
she had left in the Liverpool work-house, two years ago.  I have a great
mind to keep a list of all the business I am consulted about and employed
in.  It would be very curious.  Among other things, all penniless
Americans, or pretenders to Americanism, look upon me as their banker;
and I could ruin myself any week, if I had not laid down a rule to
consider every applicant for assistance an impostor until he prove
himself a true and responsible man,--which it is very difficult to do.
Yesterday there limped in a very respectable-looking old man, who
described himself as a citizen of Baltimore, who had been on a trip to
England and elsewhere, and, being detained longer than he expected, and
having had an attack of rheumatism, was now short of funds to pay his
passage home, and hoped that I would supply the deficiency.  He had quite
a plain, homely, though respectable manner, and, for aught I know, was
the very honestest man alive; but as he could produce no kind of proof of
his character and responsibility, I very quietly explained the
impossibility of my helping him.  I advised him to try to obtain a
passage on board of some Baltimore ship, the master of which might be
acquainted with him, or, at all events, take his word for payment, after
arrival.  This he seemed inclined to do, and took his leave.  There was a
decided aspect of simplicity about this old man, and yet I rather judge
him to be an impostor.

This is an atom: 
It is easy enough to refuse money to strangers and unknown people, or
whenever there may be any question about identity; but it will not be so
easy when I am asked for money by persons whom I know, but do not like to
trust.  They shall meet the eternal "No," however.

This is an atom: 
October 13th.--In Ormerod's history of Chester it is mentioned that
Randal, Earl of Chester, having made an inroad into Wales about 1225, the
Welshmen gathered in mass against him, and drove him into the castle of
Nothelert in Flintshire.  The Earl sent for succor to the Constable of
Chester, Roger Lacy, surnamed "Hell," on account of his fierceness.  It
was then fair-time at Chester, and the constable collected a
miscellaneous rabble of fiddlers, players, cobblers, tailors, and all
manner of debauched people, and led them to the relief of the Earl.  At
sight of this strange army the Welshmen fled; and forever after the Earl
assigned to the constable of Chester power over all fiddlers, shoemakers,
etc., within the bounds of Cheshire.  The constable retained for himself
and his heirs the control of the shoemakers; and made over to his own
steward, Dutton, that of the fiddlers and players, and for many hundreds
of years afterwards the Duttons of Dutton retained the power.  On
midsummer-day, they used to ride through Chester, attended by all the
minstrels playing on their several instruments, to the Church of St.
John, and there renew their licenses.  It is a good theme for a legend.
Sir Peter Leycester, writing in Charles the Second's time, copies the
Latin deed from the constable to Dutton; rightly translated, it seems to
mean "the magisterial power over all the lewd people . . . . in the whole
of Cheshire," but the custom grew into what is above stated.  In the time
of Henry VII., the Duttons claimed, by prescriptive right, that the
Cheshire minstrels should deliver them, at the feast of St. John, four
bottles of wine and a lance, and that each separate minstrel should pay
fourpence halfpenny. . . .

This is an atom: 
Another account says Ralph Dutton was the constable's son-in-law, and "a
lusty youth."

This is an atom: 
October 19th.--Coming to the ferry this morning a few minutes before the
boat arrived from town, I went into the ferry-house, a small stone
edifice, and found there an Irishman, his wife and three children, the
oldest eight or nine years old, and all girls.  There was a good fire
burning in the room, and the family was clustered round it, apparently
enjoying the warmth very much; but when I went in both husband and wife
very hospitably asked me to come to the fire, although there was not more
than room at it for their own party.  I declined on the plea that I was
warm enough, and then the woman said that they were very cold, having
been long on the road.  The man was gray-haired and gray-bearded, clad in
an old drab overcoat, and laden with a huge bag, which seemed to contain
bedclothing or something of the kind.  The woman was pale, with a thin,
anxious, wrinkled face, but with a good and kind expression.  The
children were quite pretty, with delicate faces, and a look of patience
and endurance in them, but yet as if they had suffered as little as they
possibly could.  The two elder were cuddled up close to the father, the
youngest, about four years old, sat in its mother's lap, and she had
taken off its small shoes and stockings, and was warming its feet at the
fire.  Their little voices had a sweet and kindly sound as they talked in
low tones to their parents and one another.  They all looked very shabby,
and yet had a decency about them; and it was touching to see how they
made themselves at home at this casual fireside, and got all the comfort
they could out of the circumstances.  By and by two or three market-women
came in and looked pleasantly at them, and said a word or two to the
children.

This is an atom: 
They did not beg of me, as I supposed they would; but after looking at
them awhile, I pulled out a piece of silver, and handed it to one of the
little girls.  She took it very readily, as if she partly expected it,
and then the father and mother thanked me, and said they had been
travelling a long distance, and had nothing to subsist upon, except what
they picked up on the road.  They found it impossible to live in England,
and were now on their way to Liverpool, hoping to get a passage back to
Ireland, where, I suppose, extreme poverty is rather better off than
here.  I heard the little girl say that she should buy bread with the
money.  There is not much that can be caught in the description of this
scene; but it made me understand, better than before, how poor people
feel, wandering about in such destitute circumstances, and how they
suffer; and yet how they have a life not quite miserable, after all, and
how family love goes along with them.  Soon the boat arrived at the pier,
and we all went on board; and as I sat in the cabin, looking up through a
broken pane in the skylight, I saw the woman's thin face, with its
anxious, motherly aspect; and the youngest child in her arms, shrinking
from the chill wind, but yet not impatiently; and the eldest of the girls
standing close by with her expression of childish endurance, but yet so
bright and intelligent that it would evidently take but a few days to
make a happy and playful child of her.  I got into the interior of this
poor family, and understand, through sympathy, more of them than I can
tell.  I am getting to possess some of the English indifference as to
beggars and poor people; but still, whenever I come face to face with
them, and have any intercourse, it seems as if they ought to be the
better for me.  I wish, instead of sixpence, I had given the poor family
ten shillings, and denied it to a begging subscriptionist, who has just
fleeced me to that amount.  How silly a man feels in this latter
predicament!

This is an atom: 
I have had a good many visitors at the Consulate from the United States
within a short time,--among others, Mr. D. D. Barnard, our late minister
to Berlin, returning homeward to-day by the Arctic; and Mr. Sickles,
Secretary of Legation to London, a fine-looking, intelligent, gentlemanly
young man. . . . With him came Judge Douglas, the chosen man of Young
America.  He is very short, extremely short, but has an uncommonly good
head, and uncommon dignity without seeming to aim at it, being free and
simple in manners.  I judge him to be a very able man, with the Western
sociability and free-fellowship.  Generally I see no reason to be ashamed
of my countrymen who come out here in public position, or otherwise
assuming the rank of gentlemen.

This is an atom: 
October 20th.--One sees incidents in the streets here, occasionally,
which could not be seen in an American city.  For instance, a week or two
since, I was passing a quiet-looking, elderly gentleman, when, all of a
sudden, without any apparent provocation, he uplifted his stick, and
struck a black-gowned boy a smart blow on the shoulders.  The boy looked
at him wofully and resentfully, but said nothing, nor can I imagine why
the thing was done.  In Tythebarne Street to-day I saw a woman suddenly
assault a man, clutch at his hair, and cuff him about the ears.  The man,
who was of decent aspect enough, immediately took to his heels, full
speed, and the woman ran after him, and, as far as I could discern the
pair, the chase continued.

This is an atom: 
October 22d.--At a dinner-party at Mr. Holland's last evening, a
gentleman, in instance of Charles Dickens's unweariability, said that
during some theatrical performances in Liverpool he acted in play and
farce, spent the rest of the night making speeches, feasting, and
drinking at table, and ended at seven o'clock in the morning by jumping
leap-frog over the backs of the whole company.

This is an atom: 
In Moore's diary he mentions a beautiful Guernsey lily having been given
to his wife, and says that the flower was originally from Guernsey.  A
ship from there had been wrecked on the coast of Japan, having many of
the lilies on board, and the next year the flowers appeared,--springing
up, I suppose, on the wave-beaten strand.

This is an atom: 
Wishing to send a letter to a dead man, who may be supposed to have gone
to Tophet,--throw it into the fire.

This is an atom: 
Sir Arthur Aston had his brains beaten out with his own wooden leg, at
the storming of Tredagh in Ireland by Cromwell.

This is an atom: 
In the county of Cheshire, many centuries ago, there lived a half-idiot,
named Nixon, who had the gift of prophecy, and made many predictions
about places, families, and important public events, since fulfilled.  He
seems to have fallen into fits of insensibility previous to uttering his
prophecies.

This is an atom: 
The family of Mainwaring (pronounced Mannering), of Bromborough, had an
ass's head for a crest.

This is an atom: 
"Richard Dawson, being sick of the plague, and perceiving he must die,
rose out of his bed and made his grave, and caused his nephew to cast
straw into the grave, which was not far from the house, and went and laid
him down in the said grave, and caused clothes to be laid upon him, and
so departed out of this world.  This he did because he was a strong man,
and heavier than his said nephew and a serving-wench were able to bury.
He died about the 24th of August.  Thus was I credibly told he did,
1625."  This was in the township of Malpas, recorded in the parish
register.

This is an atom: 
At Bickley Hall, taken down a few years ago, used to be shown the room
where the body of the Earl of Leicester was laid for a whole
twelvemonth,--1659 to 1660,--he having been kept unburied all that time,
owing to a dispute which of his heirs should pay his funeral expenses.

This is an atom: 
November 5th.--We all, together with Mr. Squarey, went to Chester last
Sunday, and attended the cathedral service.  A great deal of ceremony,
and not unimposing, but rather tedious before it was finished,--occupying
two hours or more.  The Bishop was present, but did nothing except to
pronounce the benediction.  In America the sermon is the principal thing;
but here all this magnificent ceremonial of prayer and chanted responses
and psalms and anthems was the setting to a short, meagre discourse,
which would not have been considered of any account among the elaborate
intellectual efforts of New England ministers.  While this was going on,
the light came through the stained glass windows and fell upon the
congregation, tingeing them with crimson.  After service we wandered
about the aisles, and looked at the tombs and monuments,--the oldest of
which was that of some nameless abbot, with a staff and mitre half
obliterated from his tomb, which was under a shallow arch on one side of
the cathedral.  There were also marbles on the walls, and lettered stones
in the pavement under our feet; but chiefly, if not entirely, of modern
date.  We lunched at the Royal Hotel, and then walked round the city
walls, also crossing the bridge of one great arch over the Dee, and
penetrating as far into Wales as the entrance of the Marquis of
Westminster's Park at Eaton.  It was, I think, the most lovely day as
regards weather that I have seen in England.

This is an atom: 
I passed, to-day, a man chanting a ballad in the street about a recent
murder, in a voice that had innumerable cracks in it, and was most
lugubrious.  The other day I saw a man who was reading in a loud voice
what seemed to be an account of the late riots and loss of life in Wigan.
He walked slowly along the street as he read, surrounded by a small crowd
of men, women, and children; and close by his elbow stalked a policeman,
as if guarding against a disturbance.

This is an atom: 
November 14th.--There is a heavy dun fog on the river and over the city
to-day, the very gloomiest atmosphere that ever I was acquainted with.
On the river the steamboats strike gongs or ring bells to give warning of
their approach.  There are lamps burning in the counting-rooms and
lobbies of the warehouses, and they gleam distinctly through the windows.

This is an atom: 
The other day, at the entrance of the market-house, I saw a woman sitting
in a small hand-wagon, apparently for the purpose of receiving alms.
There was no attendant at hand; but I noticed that one or two persons who
passed by seemed to inquire whether she wished her wagon to be moved.
Perhaps this is her mode of making progress about the city, by the
voluntary aid of boys and other people who help to drag her.  There is
something in this--I don't yet well know what--that has impressed me, as
if I could make a romance out of the idea of a woman living in this
manner a public life, and moving about by such means.

This is an atom: 
November 29th.--Mr. H. A. B. told me of his friend Mr. ------ (who was
formerly attache to the British Legation at Washington, and whom I saw at
Concord), that his father, a clergyman, married a second wife.  After the
marriage, the noise of a coffin being nightly carried down the stairs was
heard in the parsonage.  It could be distinguished when the coffin
reached a certain broad lauding and rested on it.  Finally, his father
had to remove to another residence.  Besides this, Mr. ------ had had
another ghostly experience,--having seen a dim apparition of an uncle at
the precise instant when the latter died in a distant place.  The attache
is a credible and honorable fellow, and talks of these matters as if he
positively believed them.  But Ghostland lies beyond the jurisdiction of
veracity.

This is an atom: 
In a garden near Chester, in taking down a summer-house, a tomb was
discovered beneath it, with a Latin inscription to the memory of an old
doctor of medicine, William Bentley, who had owned the place long ago,
and died in 1680.  And his dust and bones had lain beneath all the merry
times in the summer-house.

This is an atom: 
December 1st.--It is curious to observe how many methods people put in
practice here to pick up a halfpenny.  Yesterday I saw a man standing
bareheaded and barelegged in the mud and misty weather, playing on a
fife, in hopes to get a circle of auditors.  Nobody, however, seemed to
take any notice.  Very often a whole band of musicians will strike up,--
passing a hat round after playing a tune or two.  On board the ferry,
until the coldest weather began, there were always some wretched
musicians, with an old fiddle, an old clarinet, and an old verdigrised
brass bugle, performing during the passage, and, as the boat neared the
shore, sending round one of their number to gather contributions in the
hollow of the brass bugle.  They were a very shabby set, and must have
made a very scanty living at best.  Sometimes it was a boy with an
accordion, and his sister, a smart little girl, with a timbrel,--which,
being so shattered that she could not play on it, she used only to
collect halfpence in.  Ballad-singers, or rather chanters or croakers,
are often to be met with in the streets, but hand-organ players are not
more frequent than in our cities.

This is an atom: 
I still observe little girls and other children barelegged and barefooted
on the wet sidewalks.  There certainly never was anything so dismal as
the November weather has been; never any real sunshine; almost always a
mist; sometimes a dense fog, like slightly rarefied wool, pervading the
atmosphere.

This is an atom: 
An epitaph on a person buried on a hillside in Cheshire, together with
some others, supposed to have died of the plague, and therefore not
admitted into the churchyards:--

This is an atom: 
"Think it not strange our bones ly here,
     Thine may ly thou knowst not where."
                               Elizabeth Hampson.

This is an atom: 
These graves were near the remains of two rude stone crosses, the purpose
of which was not certainly known, although they were supposed to be
boundary marks.  Probably, as the plague-corpses were debarred from
sanctified ground, the vicinity of these crosses was chosen as having a
sort of sanctity.

This is an atom: 
"Bang beggar,"--an old Cheshire term for a parish beadle.

This is an atom: 
Hawthorne Hall, Cheshire, Macclesfield Hundred, Parish of Wilmslow, and
within the hamlet of Morley.  It was vested at an early period in the
Lathoms of Irlam, Lancaster County, and passed through the Leighs to the
Pages of Earlshaw.  Thomas Leigh Page sold it to Mr. Ralph Bower of
Wilmslow, whose children owned it in 1817.  The Leighs built a chancel in
the church of Wilmslow, where some of them are buried, their arms painted
in the windows.  The hall is an "ancient, respectable mansion of brick."

This is an atom: 
December 2d.--Yesterday, a chill, misty December day, yet I saw a woman
barefooted in the street, not to speak of children.

This is an atom: 
Cold and uncertain as the weather is, there is still a great deal of
small trade carried on in the open air.  Women and men sit in the streets
with a stock of combs and such small things to sell, the women knitting
as if they sat by a fireside.  Cheap crockery is laid out in the street,
so far out that without any great deviation from the regular
carriage-track a wheel might pass straight through it.  Stalls of apples
are innumerable, but the apples are not fit for a pig.  In some streets
herrings are very abundant, laid out on boards.  Coals seem to be for
sale by the wheelbarrowful.  Here and there you see children with some
small article for sale,--as, for instance, a girl with two linen caps.  A
somewhat overladen cart of coal was passing along and some small quantity
of the coal fell off; no sooner had the wheels passed than several women
and children gathered to the spot, like hens and chickens round a handful
of corn, and picked it up in their aprons.  We have nothing similar to
these street-women in our country.

This is an atom: 
December 10th.--I don't know any place that brings all classes into
contiguity on equal ground so completely as the waiting-room at Rock
Ferry on these frosty days.  The room is not more than eight feet,
square, with walls of stone, and wooden benches ranged round them, and an
open stove in one corner, generally well furnished with coal.  It is
almost always crowded, and I rather suspect that many persons who have no
fireside elsewhere creep in here and spend the most comfortable part of
their day.

This is an atom: 
This morning, when I looked into the room, there were one or two
gentlemen and other respectable persons; but in the best place, close to
the fire, and crouching almost into it, was an elderly beggar, with the
raggedest of overcoats, two great rents in the shoulders of it disclosing
the dingy lining, all bepatched with various stuff covered with dirt, and
on his shoes and trousers the mud of an interminable pilgrimage.  Owing
to the posture in which he sat, I could not see his face, but only the
battered crown and rim of the very shabbiest hat that ever was worn.
Regardless of the presence of women (which, indeed, Englishmen seldom do
regard when they wish to smoke), he was smoking a pipe of vile tobacco;
but, after all, this was fortunate, because the man himself was not
personally fragrant.  He was terribly squalid,--terribly; and when I had
a glimpse of his face, it well befitted the rest of his development,--
grizzled, wrinkled, weather-beaten, yet sallow, and down-looking, with a
watchful kind of eye turning upon everybody and everything, meeting the
glances of other people rather boldly, yet soon shrinking away; a long
thin nose, a gray beard of a week's growth; hair not much mixed with
gray, but rusty and lifeless;--a miserable object; but it was curious to
see how he was not ashamed of himself, but seemed to feel that he was one
of the estates of the kingdom, and had as much right to live as other
men.  He did just as he pleased, took the best place by the fire, nor
would have cared though a nobleman were forced to stand aside for him.
When the steamer's bell rang, he shouldered a large and heavy pack, like
a pilgrim with his burden of sin, but certainly journeying to hell
instead of heaven.  On board he looked round for the best position, at
first stationing himself near the boiler-pipe; but, finding the deck damp
underfoot, he went to the cabin-door, and took his stand on the stairs,
protected from the wind, but very incommodiously placed for those who
wished to pass.  All this was done without any bravado or forced
impudence, but in the most quiet way, merely because he was seeking his
own comfort, and considered that he had a right to seek it.  It was an
Englishman's spirit; but in our country, I imagine, a beggar considers
himself a kind of outlaw, and would hardly assume the privileges of a man
in any place of public resort.  Here beggary is a system, and beggars are
a numerous class, and make themselves, in a certain way, respected as
such.  Nobody evinced the slightest disapprobation of the man's
proceedings.  In America, I think, we should see many aristocratic airs
on such provocation, and probably the ferry people would there have
rudely thrust the beggar aside; giving him a shilling, however, which no
Englishman would ever think of doing.  There would also have been a great
deal of fun made of his squalid and ragged figure; whereas nobody smiled
at him this morning, nor in any way showed the slightest disrespect.
This is good; but it is the result of a state of things by no means good.
For many days there has been a great deal of fog on the river, and the
boats have groped their way along, continually striking their bells,
while, on all sides, there are responses of bell and gong; and the
vessels at anchor look shadow-like as we glide past them, and the master
of one steamer shouts a warning to the master of another which he meets.
The Englishmen, who hate to run any risk without an equivalent object,
show a good deal of caution and timidity on these foggy days.

This is an atom: 
December 13th.--Chill, frosty weather; such an atmosphere as forebodes
snow in New England, and there has been a little here.  Yet I saw a
barefooted young woman yesterday.  The feet of these poor creatures have
exactly the red complexion of their hands, acquired by constant exposure
to the cold air.

This is an atom: 
At the ferry-room, this morning, was a small, thin, anxious-looking
woman, with a bundle, seeming in rather poor circumstances, but decently
dressed, and eying other women, I thought, with an expression of slight
ill-will and distrust; also, an elderly, stout, gray-haired woman, of
respectable aspect, and two young lady-like persons, quite pretty, one of
whom was reading a shilling volume of James's "Arabella Stuart."  They
talked to one another with that up-and-down intonation which English
ladies practise, and which strikes an unaccustomed ear as rather
affected, especially in women of size and mass.  It is very different
from an American lady's mode of talking: there is the difference between
color and no color; the tone variegates it.  One of these young ladies
spoke to me, making some remark about the weather,--the first instance I
have met with of a gentlewoman's speaking to an unintroduced gentleman.
Besides these, a middle-aged man of the lower class, and also a
gentleman's out-door servant, clad in a drab great-coat, corduroy
breeches, and drab cloth gaiters buttoned from the knee to the ankle.  He
complained to the other man of the cold weather; said that a glass of
whiskey, every half-hour, would keep a man comfortable; and, accidentally
hitting his coarse foot against one of the young lady's feet, said, "Beg
pardon, ma'am,"--which she acknowledged with a slight movement of the
head.  Somehow or other, different classes seem to encounter one another
in an easier manner than with us; the shock is less palpable.  I suppose
the reason is that the distinctions are real, and therefore need not be
continually asserted.

This is an atom: 
Nervous and excitable persons need to talk a great deal, by way of
letting off their steam.

This is an atom: 
On board the Rock Ferry steamer, a gentleman coming into the cabin, a
voice addresses him from a dark corner, "How do you do, sir?"--"Speak
again!" says the gentleman.  No answer from the dark corner; and the
gentleman repeats, "Speak again!"  The speaker now comes out of the dark
corner, and sits down in a place where he can be seen.  "Ah!" cries the
gentleman, "very well, I thank you.  How do you do?  I did not recognize
your voice."  Observable, the English caution, shown in the gentleman's
not vouchsafing to say, "Very well, thank you!" till he knew his man.

This is an atom: 
What was the after life of the young man, whom Jesus, looking on,
"loved," and bade him sell all that he had, and give to the poor, and
take up his cross and follow him?  Something very deep and beautiful
might be made out of this.

This is an atom: 
December 31st.--Among the beggars of Liverpool, the hardest to encounter
is a man without any legs, and, if I mistake not, likewise deficient in
arms.  You see him before you all at once, as if he had sprouted halfway
out of the earth, and would sink down and reappear in some other place
the moment he has done with you.  His countenance is large, fresh, and
very intelligent; but his great power lies in his fixed gaze, which is
inconceivably difficult to bear.  He never once removes his eye from you
till you are quite past his range; and you feel it all the same, although
you do not meet his glance.  He is perfectly respectful; but the
intentness and directness of his silent appeal is far worse than any
impudence.  In fact, it is the very flower of impudence.  I would rather
go a mile about than pass before his battery.  I feel wronged by him, and
yet unutterably ashamed.  There must be great force in the man to produce
such an effect.  There is nothing of the customary squalidness of beggary
about him, but remarkable trimness and cleanliness.  A girl of twenty or
thereabouts, who vagabondizes about the city on her hands and knees,
possesses, to a considerable degree, the same characteristics.  I think
they hit their victims the more effectually from being below the common
level of vision.

This is an atom: 
January 3d, 1854.--Night before last there was a fall of snow, about
three or four inches, and, following it, a pretty hard frost.  On the
river, the vessels at anchor showed the snow along their yards, and on
every ledge where it could lie.  A blue sky and sunshine overhead, and
apparently a clear atmosphere close at hand; but in the distance a
mistiness became perceptible, obscuring the shores of the river, and
making the vessels look dim and uncertain.  The steamers were ploughing
along, smoking their pipes through the frosty air.  On the landing stage
and in the streets, hard-trodden snow, looking more like my New England
Home than anything I have yet seen.  Last night the thermometer fell as
low as 13 degrees, nor probably is it above 20 degrees to-day.  No such
frost has been known in England these forty years! and Mr. Wilding tells
me that he never saw so much snow before.

This is an atom: 
January 6th.--I saw, yesterday, stopping at a cabinet-maker's shop in
Church Street, a coach with four beautiful white horses, and a postilion
on each near-horse; behind, in the dicky, a footman; and on the box a
coachman, all dressed in livery.  The coach-panel bore a coat-of-arms
with a coronet, and I presume it must have been the equipage of the Earl
of Derby.  A crowd of people stood round, gazing at the coach and horses;
and when any of them spoke, it was in a lower tone than usual.  I doubt
not they all had a kind of enjoyment of the spectacle, for these English
are strangely proud of having a class above them.

This is an atom: 
Every Englishman runs to "The Times" with his little grievance, as a
child runs to his mother.

This is an atom: 
I was sent for to the police court the other morning, in the case of an
American sailor accused of robbing a shipmate at sea.  A large room, with
a great coal-fire burning on one side, and above it the portrait of Mr.
Rushton, deceased, a magistrate of many years' continuance.  A long
table, with chairs, and a witness-box.  One of the borough magistrates, a
merchant of the city, sat at the head of the table, with paper and pen
and ink before him; but the real judge was the clerk of the court, whose
professional knowledge and experience governed all the proceedings.  In
the short time while I was waiting, two cases were tried, in the first of
which the prisoner was discharged.  The second case was of a woman,--a
thin, sallow, hard-looking, careworn, rather young woman,--for stealing a
pair of slippers out of a shop: The trial occupied five minutes or less,
and she was sentenced to twenty-one days' imprisonment,--whereupon,
without speaking, she looked up wildly first into one policeman's face,
then into another's, at the same time wringing her hands with no theatric
gesture, but because her torment took this outward shape,--and was led
away.  The Yankee sailor was then brought up,--an intelligent, but
ruffian-like fellow,--and as the case was out of the jurisdiction of the
English magistrates, and as it was not worth while to get him sent over
to America for trial, he was forthwith discharged.  He stole a comforter.

This is an atom: 
If mankind were all intellect, they would be continually changing, so
that one age would be entirely unlike another.  The great conservative is
the heart, which remains the same in all ages; so that commonplaces of a
thousand years' standing are as effective as ever.

This is an atom: 
Monday, February 20th.--At the police court on Saturday, I attended the
case of the second mate and four seamen of the John and Albert, for
assaulting, beating, and stabbing the chief mate.  The chief mate has
been in the hospital ever since the assault, and was brought into the
court to-day to give evidence,--a man of thirty, black hair, black eyes,
a dark complexion, disagreeable expression; sallow, emaciated, feeble,
apparently in pain, one arm disabled.  He sat bent and drawn upward, and
had evidently been severely hurt, and was not yet fit to be out of bed.
He had some brandy-and-water to enable him to sustain himself.  He gave
his evidence very clearly, beginning (sailor-like) with telling in what
quarter the wind was at the time of the assault, and which sail was taken
in.  His testimony bore on one man only, at whom he cast a vindictive
look; but I think he told the truth as far as he knew and remembered it.
Of the prisoners the second mate was a mere youth, with long sandy hair,
and an intelligent and not unprepossessing face, dressed as neatly as a
three or four weeks' captive, with small, or no means, could well allow,
in a frock-coat, and with clean linen,--the only linen or cotton shirt in
the company.  The other four were rude, brutish sailors, in flannel or
red-baize shirts.  Three of them appeared to give themselves little
concern; but the fourth, a red-haired and red-bearded man,--Paraman, by
name,--evidently felt the pressure of the case upon himself.  He was the
one whom the mate swore to have given him the first blow; and there was
other evidence of his having been stabbed with a knife.  The captain of
the ship, the pilot, the cook, and the steward, all gave their evidence;
and the general bearing of it was, that the chief mate had a devilish
temper, and had misused the second mate and crew,--that the four seamen
had attacked him, and that Paraman had stabbed him; while all but the
steward concurred in saying that the second mate had taken no part in the
affray.  The steward, however, swore to having seen him strike the chief
mate with a wooden marlinspike, which was broken by the blow.  The
magistrate dismissed all but Paraman, whom I am to send to America for
trial.  In my opinion the chief mate got pretty nearly what he deserved,
under the code of natural justice.  While business was going forward, the
magistrate, Mr. Mansfield, talked about a fancy ball at which he had been
present the evening before, and of other matters grave and gay.  It was
very informal; we sat at the table, or stood with our backs to the fire;
policemen came and went; witnesses were sworn on the greasiest copy of
the Gospels I ever saw, polluted by hundreds and thousands of perjured
kisses; and for hours the prisoners were kept standing at the foot of the
table, interested to the full extent of their capacity, while all others
were indifferent.  At the close of the case, the police officers and
witnesses applied to me about their expenses.

This is an atom: 
Yesterday I took a walk with my wife and two children to Bebbington
Church.  A beautifully sunny morning.  My wife and U. attended church, J.
and I continued our walk.  When we were at a little distance from the
church, the bells suddenly chimed out with a most cheerful sound, and
sunny as the morning.  It is a pity we have no chimes of bells, to give
the churchward summons, at home.  People were standing about the ancient
church-porch and among the tombstones.  In the course of our walk, we
passed many old thatched cottages, built of stone, and with what looked
like a cow-house or pigsty at one end, making part of the cottage; also
an old stone farm-house, which may have been a residence of gentility in
its day.  We passed, too, a small Methodist chapel, making one of a row
of low brick edifices.  There was a sound of prayer within.  I never saw
a more unbeautiful place of worship; and it had not even a separate
existence for itself, the adjoining tenement being an alehouse.

This is an atom: 
The grass along the wayside was green, with a few daisies.  There was
green holly in the hedges, and we passed through a wood, up some of the
tree-trunks of which ran clustering ivy.

This is an atom: 
February 23d.--There came to see me the other day a young gentleman with
a mustache and a blue cloak, who announced himself as William Allingham,
and handed me a copy of his poems, a thin volume, with paper covers,
published by Routledge.  I thought I remembered hearing his name, but had
never seen any of his works.  His face was intelligent, dark, pleasing,
and not at all John-Bullish.  He said that he had been employed in the
Customs in Ireland, and was now going to London to live by literature,--
to be connected with some newspaper, I imagine.  He had been in London
before, and was acquainted with some of the principal literary people,--
among others, Tennyson and Carlyle.  He seemed to have been on rather
intimate terms with Tennyson.  We talked awhile in my dingy and dusky
Consulate, and he then took leave.  His manners are good, and he appears
to possess independence of mind.

This is an atom: 
Yesterday I saw a British regiment march down to George's Pier, to embark
in the Niagara for Malta.  The troops had nothing very remarkable about
them; but the thousands of ragged and squalid wretches, who thronged the
pier and streets to gaze on them, were what I had not seen before in such
masses.  This was the first populace I have beheld; for even the Irish,
on the other side of the water, acquire a respectability of aspect.  John
Bull is going with his whole heart into the Turkish war.  He is very
foolish.  Whatever the Czar may propose to himself, it is for the
interest of democracy that he should not be easily put down.  The
regiment, on its way to embark, carried the Queen's colors, and, side by
side with them, the banner of the 28th,--yellow, with the names of the
Peninsular and other battles in which it had been engaged inscribed on it
in a double column.  It is a very distinguished regiment; and Mr. Henry
Bright mentioned as one of its distinctions, that Washington had formerly
been an officer in it.  I never heard of this.

This is an atom: 
February 27th.--We walked to Woodside in the pleasant forenoon, and
thence crossed to Liverpool.  On our way to Woodside, we saw the remains
of the old Birkenhead Priory, built of the common red freestone, much
time-worn, with ivy creeping over it, and birds evidently at hone in its
old crevices.  These ruins are pretty extensive, and seem to be the
remains of a quadrangle.  A handsome modern church, likewise of the same
red freestone, has been built on part of the site occupied by the Priory;
and the organ was sounding within, while we walked about the premises.
On some of the ancient arches, there were grotesquely carved stone faces.
The old walls have been sufficiently restored to make them secure,
without destroying their venerable aspect.  It is a very interesting
spot; and so much the more so because a modern town, with its brick and
stone houses, its flags and pavements, has sprung up about the ruins,
which were new a thousand years ago.  The station of the Chester railway
is within a hundred yards.  Formerly the monks of this Priory kept the
only ferry that then existed on the Mersey.

This is an atom: 
At a dinner at Mr. Bramley Moore's a little while ago, we had a
prairie-hen from the West of America.  It was a very delicate bird, and a
gentleman carved it most skilfully to a dozen guests, and had still a
second slice to offer to them.

This is an atom: 
Aboard the ferry-boat yesterday, there was a laboring man eating oysters.
He took them one by one from his pocket in interminable succession,
opened them with his jack-knife, swallowed each one, threw the shell
overboard, and then sought for another.  Having concluded his meal, he
took out a clay tobacco-pipe, filled it, lighted it with a match, and
smoked it,--all this, while the other passengers were looking at him, and
with a perfect coolness and independence, such as no single man can ever
feel in America.  Here a man does not seem to consider what other people
will think of his conduct, but only whether it suits his own convenience
to do so and so.  It may be the better way.

This is an atom: 
A French military man, a veteran of all Napoleon's wars, is now living,
with a false leg and arm, both movable by springs, false teeth, a false
eye, a silver nose with a flesh-colored covering, and a silver plate
replacing part of the skull.  He has the cross of the Legion of Honor.

This is an atom: 
March 18th.--On Saturday I went with Mr. B---- to the Dingle, a pleasant
domain on the banks of the Mersey almost opposite to Rock Ferry.  Walking
home, we looked into Mr. Thorn's Unitarian Chapel, Mr. B----'s family's
place of worship.  There is a little graveyard connected with the chapel,
a most uninviting and unpicturesque square of ground, perhaps thirty or
forty yards across, in the midst of back fronts of city buildings.  About
half the space was occupied by flat tombstones, level with the ground,
the remainder being yet vacant.  Nevertheless, there were perhaps more
names of men generally known to the world on these few tombstones than in
any other churchyard in Liverpool,--Roscoe, Blanco White, and the Rev.
William Enfield, whose name has a classical sound in my ears, because,
when a little boy, I used to read his "Speaker" at school.  In the vestry
of the chapel there were many books, chiefly old theological works, in
ancient print and binding, much mildewed and injured by the damp.  The
body of the chapel is neat, but plain, and, being not very large, has a
kind of social and family aspect, as if the clergyman and his people must
needs have intimate relations among themselves.  The Unitarian sect in
Liverpool have, as a body, great wealth and respectability.

This is an atom: 
Yesterday I walked with my wife and children to the brow of a hill,
overlooking Birkenhead and Tranmere, and commanding a fine view of the
river, and Liverpool beyond.  All round about new and neat residences for
city people are springing up, with fine names,--Eldon Terrace, Rose
Cottage, Belvoir Villa, etc., etc., with little patches of ornamented
garden or lawn in front, and heaps of curious rock-work, with which the
English are ridiculously fond of adorning their front yards.  I rather
think the middling classes--meaning shopkeepers, and other
respectabilities of that level--are better lodged here than in America;
and, what I did not expect, the houses are a great deal newer than in our
new country!  Of course, this can only be the case in places
circumstanced like Liverpool and its suburbs.  But, scattered among these
modern villas, there are old stone cottages of the rudest structure, and
doubtless hundreds of years old, with thatched roofs, into which the
grass has rooted itself, and now looks verdant.  These cottages are in
themselves as ugly as possible, resembling a large kind of pigsty; but
often, by dint of the verdure on their thatch and the shrubbery
clustering about them, they look picturesque.

This is an atom: 
The old-fashioned flowers in the gardens of New England--blue-bells,
crocuses, primroses, foxglove, and many others--appear to be wild flowers
here on English soil.  There is something very touching and pretty in
this fact, that the Puritans should have carried their field and hedge
flowers, and nurtured theme in their gardens, until, to us, they seem
entirely the product of cultivation.

This is an atom: 
March 16th.--Yesterday, at the coroner's court, attending the inquest on
a black sailor who died on board an American vessel, after her arrival at
this port.  The court-room is capable of accommodating perhaps fifty
people, dingy, with a pyramidal skylight above, and a single window on
one side, opening into a gloomy back court.  A private room, also lighted
with a pyramidal skylight, is behind the court-room, into which I was
asked, and found the coroner, a gray-headed, grave, intelligent, broad,
red-faced man, with an air of some authority, well mannered and
dignified, but not exactly a gentleman,--dressed in a blue coat, with a
black cravat, showing a shirt-collar above it.  Considering how many and
what a variety of cases of the ugliest death are constantly coming before
him, he was much more cheerful than could be expected, and had a kind of
formality and orderliness which I suppose balances the exceptionalities
with which he has to deal.  In the private room with him was likewise the
surgeon, who professionally attends the court.  We chatted about suicide
and such matters,--the surgeon, the coroner, and I,--until the American
case was ready, when we adjourned to the court-room, and the coroner
began the examination.  The American captain was a rude, uncouth
Down-Easter, about thirty years old, and sat on a bench, doubled and bent
into an indescribable attitude, out of which he occasionally straightened
himself, all the time toying with a ruler, or some such article.  The
case was one of no interest; the man had been frost-bitten, and died from
natural causes, so that no censure was deserved or passed upon the
captain.  The jury, who had been examining the body, were at first
inclined to think that the man had not been frostbitten, but that his
feet had been immersed in boiling water; but, on explanation by the
surgeon, readily yielded their opinion, and gave the verdict which the
coroner put into their mouths, exculpating the captain from all blame.
In fact, it is utterly impossible that a jury of chance individuals
should not be entirely governed by the judgment of so experienced and
weighty a man as the coroner.  In the court-room were two or three police
officers in uniform, and some other officials, a very few idle
spectators, and a few witnesses waiting to be examined.  And while the
case was going forward, a poor-looking woman came in, and I heard her, in
an undertone, telling an attendant of a death that had just occurred.
The attendant received the communication in a very quiet and
matter-of-course way, said that it should be attended to, and the woman
retired.

This is an atom: 
THE DIARY OF A CORONER would be a work likely to meet with large popular
acceptance.  A dark passageway, only a few yards in extent, leads from
the liveliest street in Liverpool to this coroner's court-room, where all
the discussion is about murder and suicide.  It seems, that, after a
verdict of suicide, the corpse can only be buried at midnight, without
religious rites.

This is an atom: 
"His lines are cast in pleasant places,"--applied to a successful angler.

This is an atom: 
A woman's chastity consists, like an onion, of a series of coats.  You
may strip off the outer ones without doing much mischief, perhaps none at
all; but you keep taking off one after another, in expectation of coming
to the inner nucleus, including the whole value of the matter.  It proves
however, that there is no such nucleus, and that chastity is diffused
through the whole series of coats, is lessened with the removal of each,
and vanishes with the final one, which you supposed would introduce you
to the hidden pearl.

This is an atom: 
March 23d.--Mr. B. and I took a cab Saturday afternoon, and drove out of
the city in the direction of Knowsley.  On our way we saw many
gentlemen's or rich people's places, some of them dignified with the
title of Halls,--with lodges at their gates, and standing considerably
removed from the road.  The greater part of them were built of brick,--a
material with which I have not been accustomed to associate ideas of
grandeur; but it was much in use here in Lancashire, in the Elizabethan
age,--more, I think, than now.  These suburban residences, however, are
of much later date than Elizabeth's time.  Among other places, Mr. B.
called at the Hazels, the residence of Sir Thomas Birch, a kinsman of
his.  It is a large brick mansion, and has old trees and shrubbery about
it, the latter very fine and verdant,--hazels, holly, rhododendron, etc.
Mr. B. went in, and shortly afterwards Sir Thomas Birch came out,--a very
frank and hospitable gentleman,--and pressed me to enter and take
luncheon, which latter hospitality I declined.

This is an atom: 
His house is in very nice order.  He had a good many pictures, and,
amongst them, a small portrait of his mother, painted by Sir Thomas
Lawrence, when a youth.  It is unfinished, and when the painter was at
the height of his fame, he was asked to finish it.  But Lawrence, after
looking at the picture, refused to retouch it, saying that there was a
merit in this early sketch which he could no longer attain.  It was
really a very beautiful picture of a lovely woman.

This is an atom: 
Sir Thomas Birch proposed to go with us and get us admittance into
Knowsley Park, where we could not possibly find entrance without his aid.
So we went to the stables, where the old groom had already shown
hospitality to our cabman, by giving his horse some provender, and
himself some beer.  There seemed to be a kindly and familiar sort of
intercourse between the old servant and the Baronet, each of them, I
presume, looking on their connection as indissoluble.

This is an atom: 
The gate-warden of Knowsley Park was an old woman, who readily gave us
admittance at Sir Thomas Birch's request.  The family of the Earl of
Derby is not now at the Park.  It was a very bad time of year to see it;
the trees just showing the earliest symptoms of vitality, while whole
acres of ground were covered with large, dry, brown ferns,--which I
suppose are very beautiful when green.  Two or three hares scampered out
of these ferns, and sat on their hind legs looking about them, as we
drove by.  A sheet of water had been drawn off, in order to deepen its
bed.  The oaks did not seem to me so magnificent as they should be in an
ancient noble property like this.  A century does not accomplish so much
for a tree, in this slow region, as it does in ours.  I think, however,
that they were more individual and picturesque, with more character in
their contorted trunks; therein somewhat resembling apple-trees.  Our
forest-trees have a great sameness of character, like our people,--
because one and the other grow too closely.

This is an atom: 
In one part of the Park we came to a small tower, for what purpose I know
not, unless as an observatory; and near it was a marble statue on a high
pedestal.  The statue had been long exposed to the weather, and was
overgrown and ingrained with moss and lichens, so that its classic beauty
was in some sort gothicized.  A half-mile or so from this point, we saw
the mansion of Knowsley, in the midst of a very fine prospect, with a
tolerably high ridge of hills in the distance.  The house itself is
exceedingly vast, a front and two wings, with suites of rooms, I suppose,
interminable.  The oldest part, Sir Thomas Birch told us, is a tower of
the time of Henry VII.  Nevertheless, the effect is not overwhelming,
because the edifice looks low in proportion to its great extent over the
ground; and besides, a good deal of it is built of brick, with white
window-frames, so that, looking at separate parts, I might think them
American structures, without the smart addition of green Venetian blinds,
so universal with us.  Portions, however, were built of red freestone;
and if I had looked at it longer, no doubt I should have admired it more.
We merely drove round it from the rear to the front.  It stands in my
memory rather like a college or a hospital, than as the ancestral
residence of a great English noble.

This is an atom: 
We left the Park in another direction, and passed through a part of Lord
Sefton's property, by a private road.

This is an atom: 
By the by, we saw half a dozen policemen, in their blue coats and
embroidered collars, after entering Knowsley Park; but the Earl's own
servants would probably have supplied their place, had the family been at
home.  The mansion of Croxteth, the seat of Lord Sefton, stands near the
public road, and, though large, looked of rather narrow compass after
Knowsley.

This is an atom: 
The rooks were talking together very loquaciously in the high tops of the
trees near Sir Thomas Birch's house, it being now their building-time.
It was a very pleasant sound, the noise being comfortably softened by the
remote height.  Sir Thomas said that more than half a century ago the
rooks used to inhabit another grove of lofty trees, close in front of the
house; but being noisy, and not altogether cleanly in their habits, the
ladies of the family grew weary of them and wished to remove them.
Accordingly, the colony was driven away, and made their present
settlement in a grove behind the house.  Ever since that time not a rook
has built in the ancient grove; every year, however, one or another pair
of young rooks attempt to build among the deserted tree-tops, but the old
rooks tear the new nest to pieces as often as it is put together.  Thus,
either the memory of aged individual rooks or an authenticated tradition
in their society has preserved the idea that the old grove is forbidden
and inauspicious to them.

This is an atom: 
A soil of General Arnold, named William Fitch Arnold, and born in 1794,
now possesses the estate of Little Messenden Abbey, Bucks County, and is
a magistrate for that county.  He was formerly Captain of the 19th
Lancers.  He has now two sons and four daughters.  The other three sons
of General Arnold, all older than this one, and all military men, do not
appear to have left children; but a daughter married to Colonel Phipps,
of the Mulgrave family, has a son and two daughters.  I question whether
any of our true-hearted Revolutionary heroes have left a more prosperous
progeny than this arch-traitor.  I should like to know their feelings
with respect to their ancestor.

This is an atom: 
April 3d.--I walked with J-----, two days ago, to Eastham, a village on
the road to Chester, and five or six miles from Rock Ferry.  On our way
we passed through a village, in the centre of which was a small stone
pillar, standing on a pedestal of several steps, on which children were
sitting and playing.  I take it to have been an old Catholic cross; at
least, I know not what else it is.  It seemed very ancient.  Eastham is
the finest old English village I have seen, with many antique houses, and
with altogether a rural and picturesque aspect, unlike anything in
America, and yet possessing a familiar look, as if it were something I
had dreamed about.  There were thatched stone cottages intermixed with
houses of a better kind, and likewise a gateway and gravelled walk, that
perhaps gave admittance to the Squire's mansion.  It was not merely one
long, wide street, as in most New England villages, but there were
several crooked ways, gathering the whole settlement into a pretty small
compass.  In the midst of it stood a venerable church of the common red
freestone, with a most reverend air, considerably smaller than that of
Bebbington, but more beautiful, and looking quite as old.  There was ivy
on its spire and elsewhere.  It looked very quiet and peaceful, and as if
it had received the people into its low arched door every Sabbath for
many centuries.  There were many tombstones about it, some level with the
ground, some raised on blocks of stone, on low pillars, moss-grown and
weather-worn; and probably these were but the successors of other stones
that had quite crumbled away, or been buried by the accumulation of dead
men's dust above them.  In the centre of the churchyard stood an old
yew-tree, with immense trunk, which was all decayed within, so that it is
a wonder how the tree retains any life,--which, nevertheless, it does.
It was called "the old Yew of Eastham," six hundred years ago!

This is an atom: 
After passing through the churchyard, we saw the village inn on the other
side.  The doors were fastened, but a girl peeped out of the window at
us, and let us in, ushering us into a very neat parlor.  There was a
cheerful fire in the grate, a straw carpet on the floor, a mahogany
sideboard, and a mahogany table in the middle of the room; and, on the
walls, the portraits of mine host (no doubt) and of his wife and
daughters,--a very nice parlor, and looking like what I might have found
in a country tavern at home, only this was an ancient house, and there is
nothing at home like the glimpse, from the window, of the church, and its
red, ivy-grown tower.  I ordered some lunch, being waited on by the girl,
who was very neat, intelligent, and comely,--and more respectful than a
New England maid.  As we came out of the inn, some village urchins left
their play, and ran to me begging, calling me "Master!"  They turned at
once from play to begging, and, as I gave them nothing, they turned to
their play again.

This is an atom: 
This village is too far from Liverpool to have been much injured as yet
by the novelty of cockney residences, which have grown up almost
everywhere else, so far as I have visited.  About a mile from it,
however, is the landing-place of a steamer (which runs regularly, except
in the winter months), where a large, new hotel is built.  The grounds
about it are extensive and well wooded.  We got some biscuits at the
hotel, and I gave the waiter (a splendid gentleman in black) four
halfpence, being the surplus of a shilling.  He bowed and thanked me very
humbly.  An American does not easily bring his mind to the small measure
of English liberality to servants; if anything is to be given, we are
ashamed not to give more, especially to clerical-looking persons, in
black suits and white neckcloths.

This is an atom: 
I stood on the Exchange at noon, to-day, to see the 18th Regiment, the
Connaught Rangers, marching down to embark for the East.  They were a
body of young, healthy, and cheerful-looking men, and looked greatly
better than the dirty crowd that thronged to gaze at them.  The royal
banner of England, quartering the lion, the leopard, and the harp, waved
on the town-house, and looked gorgeous and venerable.  Here and there a
woman exchanged greetings with an individual soldier, as he marched
along, and gentlemen shook hands with officers with whom they happened to
be acquainted.  Being a stranger in the land, it seemed as if I could see
the future in the present better than if I had been an Englishman; so I
questioned with myself how many of these ruddy-cheeked young fellows,
marching so stoutly away, would ever tread English ground again.  The
populace did not evince any enthusiasm, yet there could not possibly be a
war to which the country could assent more fully than to this.  I
somewhat doubt whether the English populace really feels a vital interest
in the nation.

This is an atom: 
Some years ago, a piece of rude marble sculpture, representing St. George
and the Dragon, was found over the fireplace of a cottage near Rock
Ferry, on the road to Chester.  It was plastered over with pipe-clay, and
its existence was unknown to the cottagers, until a lady noticed the
projection and asked what it was.  It was supposed to have originally
adorned the walls of the Priory at Birkenhead.  It measured fourteen and
a half by nine inches, in which space were the heads of a king and queen,
with uplifted hands, in prayer; their daughters also in prayer, and
looking very grim; a lamb, the slain dragon, and St. George, proudly
prancing on what looks like a donkey, brandishing a sword over his head.

This is an atom: 
The following is a legend inscribed on the inner margin of a curious old
box:--

This is an atom: 
"From Birkenhead into Hilbree
     A squirrel might leap from tree to tree."

This is an atom: 
I do not know where Hilbree is; but all round Birkenhead a squirrel would
scarcely find a single tree to climb upon.  All is pavement and brick
buildings now.

This is an atom: 
Good Friday.--The English and Irish think it good to plant on this day,
because it was the day when our Saviour's body was laid in the grave.
Seeds, therefore, are certain to rise again.

This is an atom: 
At dinner the other day, Mrs. ------ mentioned the origin of Franklin's
adoption of the customary civil dress, when going to court as a
diplomatist.  It was simply that his tailor had disappointed him of his
court suit, and he wore his plain one with great reluctance, because he
had no other.  Afterwards, gaining great success and praise by his
mishap, he continued to wear it from policy.

This is an atom: 
The grandmother of Mrs. ------ died fifty years ago, at the age of
twenty-eight.  She had great personal charms, and among them a head of
beautiful chestnut hair.  After her burial in the family tomb, the coffin
of one of her children was laid on her own, so that the lid seems to have
decayed, or been broken from this cause; at any rate, this was the case
when the tomb was opened about a year ago.  The grandmother's coffin was
then found to be filled with beautiful, glossy, living chestnut ringlets,
into which her whole substance seems to have been transformed, for there
was nothing else but these shining curls, the growth of half a century in
the tomb.  An old man, with a ringlet of his youthful mistress treasured
on his heart, might be supposed to witness this wonderful thing.

This is an atom: 
Madam ------, who is now at my house, and very infirm, though not old,
was once carried to the grave, and on the point of being buried.  It was
in Barbary, where her husband was Consul-General.  He was greatly
attached to her, and told the pall-bearers at the grave that he must see
her once more.  When her face was uncovered, he thought he discerned
signs of life, and felt a warmth.  Finally she revived, and for many
years afterwards supposed the funeral procession to have been a dream;
she having been partially conscious throughout, and having felt the wind
blowing on her, and lifting the shroud from her feet,--for I presume she
was to be buried in Oriental style, without a coffin.  Long after, in
London, when she was speaking of this dream, her husband told her the
facts, and she fainted away.  Whenever it is now mentioned, her face
turns white.  Mr. ------, her son, was born on shipboard, on the coast of
Spain, and claims four nationalities,--those of Spain, England, Ireland,
and the United States; his father being Irish, his mother a native of
England, himself a naturalized citizen of the United States, and his
father having registered his birth and baptism in a Catholic church of
Gibraltar, which gives him Spanish privileges.  He has hereditary claims
to a Spanish countship.  His infancy was spent in Barbary, and his lips
first lisped in Arabic.  There has been an unsettled and wandering
character in his whole life.

This is an atom: 
The grandfather of Madam ------, who was a British officer, once
horsewhipped Paul Jones,--Jones being a poltroon.  How singular it is
that the personal courage of famous warriors should be so often called in
question!

This is an atom: 
May 20th.--I went yesterday to a hospital to take the oath of a mate to a
protest.  He had met with a severe accident by a fall on shipboard.  The
hospital is a large edifice of red freestone, with wide, airy passages,
resounding with footsteps passing through them.  A porter was waiting in
the vestibule.  Mr. Wilding and myself were shown to the parlor, in the
first instance,--a neat, plainly furnished room, with newspapers and
pamphlets lying on the table and sofas.  Soon the surgeon of the house
came,--a brisk, alacritous, civil, cheerful young man, by whom we were
shown to the apartment where the mate was lying.  As we went through the
principal passage, a man was borne along in a chair looking very pale,
rather wild, and altogether as if he had just been through great
tribulation, and hardly knew as yet whereabouts he was.  I noticed that
his left arm was but a stump, and seemed done up in red baize,--at all
events it was of a scarlet line.  The surgeon shook his right hand
cheerily, and he was carried on.  This was a patient who had just had his
arm cut off.  He had been a rough person apparently, but now there was a
kind of tenderness about him, through pain and helplessness.

This is an atom: 
In the chamber where the mate lay, there were seven beds, all of them
occupied by persons who had met with accidents.  In the centre of the
room was a stationary pine table, about the length of a man, intended, I
suppose, to stretch patients upon for necessary operations.  The
furniture of the beds was plain and homely.  I thought that the faces of
the patients all looked remarkably intelligent, though they were
evidently men of the lower classes.  Suffering had educated them morally
and intellectually.  They gazed curiously at Mr. Wilding and me, but
nobody said a word.  In the bed next to the mate lay a little boy with a
broken thigh.  The surgeon observed that children generally did well with
accidents; and this boy certainly looked very bright and cheerful.  There
was nothing particularly interesting about the mate.

This is an atom: 
After finishing our business, the surgeon showed us into another room of
the surgical ward, likewise devoted to cases of accident and injury.  All
the beds were occupied, and in two of them lay two American sailors who
had recently been stabbed.  They had been severely hurt, but were doing
very well.  The surgeon thought that it was a good arrangement to have
several cases together, and that the patients kept up one another's
spirits,--being often merry together.  Smiles and laughter may operate
favorably enough from bed to bed; but dying groans, I should think, must
be somewhat of a discouragement.  Nevertheless, the previous habits and
modes of life of such people as compose the more numerous class of
patients in a hospital must be considered before deciding this matter.
It is very possible that their misery likes such bedfellows as it here
finds.

This is an atom: 
As we were taking our leave, the surgeon asked us if we should not like
to see the operating-room; and before we could reply he threw open the
door, and behold, there was a roll of linen "garments rolled in blood,"--
and a bloody fragment of a human arm!  The surgeon glanced at me, and
smiled kindly, but as if pitying my discomposure.

This is an atom: 
Gervase Elwes, son of Sir Gervase Elwes, Baronet, of Stoke, Suffolk,
married Isabella, daughter of Sir Thomas Hervey, Knight, and sister of
the first Earl of Bristol.  This Gervase died before his father, but left
a son, Henry, who succeeded to the Baronetcy.  Sir Henry died without
issue, and was succeeded by his sister's son, John Maggott Twining, who
assumed the name of Elwes.  He was the famous miser, and must have had
Hawthorne blood in him, through his grandfather, Gervase, whose mother
was a Hawthorne.  It was to this Gervase that my ancestor, William
Hawthorne, devised some land in Massachusetts, "if he would come over,
and enjoy it."  My ancestor calls him his nephew.

This is an atom: 
June 12th.--Barry Cornwall, Mr. Procter, called on me a week or more ago,
but I happened not to be in the office.  Saturday last he called again,
and as I had crossed to Rock Park he followed me thither.  A plain,
middle-sized, English-looking gentleman, elderly, with short, white hair,
and particularly quiet in his manners.  He talks in a somewhat low tone
without emphasis, scarcely distinct.  His head has a good outline, and
would look well in marble.  I liked him very well.  He talked
unaffectedly, showing an author's regard to his reputation, and was
evidently pleased to hear of his American celebrity.  He said that in his
younger days he was a scientific pugilist, and once took a journey to
have a sparring encounter with the Game-Chicken.  Certainly, no one would
have looked for a pugilist in this subdued old gentleman.  He is now
Commissioner of Lunacy, and makes periodical circuits through the
country, attending to the business of his office.  He is slightly deaf,
and this may be the cause of his unaccented utterance,--owing to his not
being able to regulate his voice exactly by his own ear.  He is a good
man, and much better expressed by his real name, Procter, than by his
poetical one, Barry Cornwall. . . . He took my hand in both of his at
parting. . . .

This is an atom: 
June 17th.--At eleven, at this season (and how much longer I know not),
there is still a twilight.  If we could only have such dry, deliciously
warm evenings as we used to have in our own land, what enjoyment there
might be in these interminable twilights!  But here we close the
window-shutters, and make ourselves cosey by a coal-fire.

This is an atom: 
All three of the children, and, I think, my wife and myself, are going
through the hooping-cough.  The east-wind of this season and region is
most horrible.  There have been no really warm days; for though the
sunshine is sometimes hot, there is never any diffused heat throughout
the air.  On passing from the sunshine into the shade, we immediately
feel too cool.

This is an atom: 
June 20th.--The vagabond musicians about town are very numerous.  On
board the steam ferry-boats, I have heretofore spoken of them.  They
infest them from May to November, for very little gain apparently.  A
shilling a day per man must be the utmost of their emolument.  It is
rather sad to see somewhat respectable old men engaged in this way, with
two or three younger associates.  Their instruments look much the worse
for wear, and even my unmusical ear can distinguish more discord than
harmony.  They appear to be a very quiet and harmless people.  Sometimes
there is a woman playing on a fiddle, while her husband blows a wind
instrument.  In the streets it is not unusual to find a band of half a
dozen performers, who, without any provocation or reason whatever, sound
their brazen instruments till the houses re-echo.  Sometimes one passes a
man who stands whistling a tune most unweariably, though I never saw
anybody give him anything.  The ballad-singers are the strangest, from
the total lack of any music in their cracked voices.  Sometimes you see a
space cleared in the street, and a foreigner playing, while a girl--
weather-beaten, tanned, and wholly uncomely in face and shabby in attire
dances ballets.  The common people look on, and never criticise or treat
any of these poor devils unkindly or uncivilly; but I do not observe that
they give them anything.

This is an atom: 
A crowd--or, at all events, a moderate-sized group--is much more easily
drawn together here than with us.  The people have a good deal of idle
and momentary curiosity, and are always ready to stop when another person
has stopped, so as to see what has attracted his attention.  I hardly
ever pause to look at a shop-window, without being immediately incommoded
by boys and men, who stop likewise, and would forthwith throng the
pavement if I did not move on.

This is an atom: 
June 30th.--If it is not known how and when a man dies, it makes a ghost
of him for many years thereafter, perhaps for centuries.  King Arthur is
an example; also the Emperor Frederic, and other famous men, who were
thought to be alive ages after their disappearance.  So with private
individuals.  I had an uncle John, who went a voyage to sea about the
beginning of the War of 1812, and has never returned to this hour.  But
as long as his mother lived, as many as twenty years, she never gave up
the hope of his return, and was constantly hearing stories of persons
whose description answered to his.  Some people actually affirmed that
they had seen him in various parts of the world.  Thus, so far as her
belief was concerned, he still walked the earth.  And even to this day I
never see his name, which is no very uncommon one, without thinking that
this may be the lost uncle.

This is an atom: 
Thus, too, the French Dauphin still exists, or a kind of ghost of him;
the three Tells, too, in the cavern of Uri.

This is an atom: 
July 6th.--Mr. Cecil, the other day, was saying that England could
produce as fine peaches as any other country.  I asked what was the
particular excellence of a peach, and he answered, "Its cooling and
refreshing quality, like that of a melon!"  Just think of this idea of
the richest, most luscious, of all fruits!  But the untravelled
Englishman has no more idea of what fruit is than of what sunshine is; he
thinks he has tasted the first and felt the last, but they are both alike
watery.  I heard a lady in Lord Street talking about the "broiling sun,"
when I was almost in a shiver.  They keep up their animal heat by means
of wine and ale, else they could not bear this climate.

This is an atom: 
July 19th.--A week ago I made a little tour in North Wales with Mr.
Bright.  We left Birkenhead by railway for Chester at two o'clock; thence
for Bangor; thence by carriage over the Menai bridge to Beaumaris.  At
Beaumaris, a fine old castle,--quite coming up to my idea of what an old
castle should be.  A gray, ivy-hung exterior wall, with large round
towers at intervals; within this another wall, the place of the
portcullis between; and again, within the second wall the castle itself,
with a spacious green court-yard in front.  The outer wall is so thick
that a passage runs in it all round the castle, which covers a space of
three acres.  This passage gives access to a chapel, still very perfect,
and to various apartments in the towers,--all exceedingly dismal, and
giving very unpleasant impressions of the way in which the garrison of
the castle lived.  The main castle is entirely roofless, but the hall and
other rooms are pointed out by the guide, and the whole is tapestried
with abundant ivy, so that my impression is of gray walls, with here and
there a vast green curtain; a carpet of green over the floors of halls
and apartments; and festoons around all the outer battlement, with an
uneven and rather perilous foot-path running along the top.  There is a
fine vista through the castle itself, and the two gateways of the two
encompassing walls.  The passage within the wall is very rude, both
underfoot and on each side, with various ascents and descents of rough
steps,--sometimes so low that your head is in danger; and dark, except
where a little light comes through a loophole or window in the thickness
of the wall.  In front of the castle a tennis-court was fitted up, by
laying a smooth pavement on the ground, and casing the walls with tin or
zinc, if I recollect aright.  All this was open to the sky; and when we
were there, some young men of the town were playing at the game.  There
are but very few of these tennis-courts in England; and this old castle
was a very strange place for one.

This is an atom: 
The castle is the property of Sir Richard Bulkely, whose seat is in the
vicinity, and who owns a great part of the island of Anglesea, on which
Beaumaris lies.  The hotel where we stopped was the Bulkely Arms, and Sir
Richard has a kind of feudal influence in the town.

This is an atom: 
In the morning we walked along a delightful road, bordering on the Menai
Straits, to Bangor Ferry.  It was really a very pleasant road, overhung
by a growth of young wood, exceedingly green and fresh.  English trees
are green all about their stems, owing to the creeping plants that
overrun them.  There were some flowers in the hedges, such as we
cultivate in gardens.  At the ferry, there was a whitewashed cottage; a
woman or two, some children, and a fisherman-like personage, walking to
and fro before the door.  The scenery of the strait is very beautiful and
picturesque, and directly opposite to us lay Bangor,--the strait being
here almost a mile across.  An American ship from Boston lay in the
middle of it.  The ferry-boat was just putting off for the Bangor side,
and, by the aid of a sail, soon neared the shore.

This is an atom: 
At Bangor we went to a handsome hotel, and hired a carriage and two
horses for some Welsh place, the name of which I forget; neither can I
remember a single name of the places through which we posted that day,
nor could I spell them if I heard them pronounced, nor pronounce them if
I saw them spelt.  It was a circuit of about forty miles, bringing us to
Conway at last.  I remember a great slate-quarry; and also that many of
the cottages, in the first part of our drive, were built of blocks of
slate.  The mountains were very bold, thrusting themselves up abruptly in
peaks,--not of the dumpling formation, which is somewhat too prevalent
among the New England mountains.  At one point we saw Snowdon, with its
bifold summit.  We also visited the smaller waterfall (this is a
translation of an unpronounceable Welsh name), which is the largest in
Wales.  It was a very beautiful rapid, and the guide-book considers it
equal in sublimity to Niagara.  Likewise there were one or two lakes
which the guide-book greatly admired, but which to me, who remembered a
hundred sheets of blue water in New England, seemed nothing more than
sullen and dreary puddles, with bare banks, and wholly destitute of
beauty.  I think they were nowhere more than a hundred yards across.  But
the hills were certainly very good, and, though generally bare of trees,
their outlines thereby were rendered the stronger and more striking.

This is an atom: 
Many of the Welsh women, particularly the older ones, wear black beaver
hats, high-crowned, and almost precisely like men's.  It makes them look
ugly and witchlike.  Welsh is still the prevalent language, and the only
one spoken by a great many of the inhabitants.  I have had Welsh people
in my office, on official business, with whom I could not communicate
except through an interpreter.

This is an atom: 
At some unutterable village we went into a little church, where we saw an
old stone image of a warrior, lying on his back, with his hands clasped.
It was the natural son (if I remember rightly) of David, Prince of Wales,
and was doubtless the better part of a thousand years old.  There was
likewise a stone coffin of still greater age; some person of rank and
renown had mouldered to dust within it, but it was now open and empty.
Also, there were monumental brasses on the walls, engraved with portraits
of a gentleman and lady in the costumes of Elizabeth's time.  Also, on
one of the pews, a brass record of some persons who slept in the vault
beneath; so that, every Sunday, the survivors and descendants kneel and
worship directly over their dead ancestors.  In the churchyard, on a flat
tombstone, there was the representation of a harp.  I supposed that it
must be the resting-place of a bard; but the inscription was in memory of
a merchant, and a skilful manufacturer of harps.

This is an atom: 
This was a very delightful town.  We saw a great many things which it is
now too late to describe, the sharpness of the first impression being
gone; but I think I can produce something of the sentiment of it
hereafter.

This is an atom: 
We arrived at Conway late in the afternoon, to take the rail for Chester.
I must see Conway, with its old gray wall and its unrivalled castle,
again.  It was better than Beaumaris, and I never saw anything more
picturesque than the prospect from the castle-wall towards the sea.  We
reached Chester at 10 P. M.  The next morning, Mr. Bright left for
Liverpool before I was awake.  I visited the Cathedral, where the organ
was sounding, sauntered through the Rows, bought some playthings for the
children, and left for home soon after twelve.

This is an atom: 
Liverpool, August 8th.--Visiting the Zoological Gardens the other day
with J-----, it occurred to me what a fantastic kind of life a person
connected with them might be depicted as leading,--a child, for instance.
The grounds are very extensive, and include arrangements for all kinds of
exhibitions calculated to attract the idle people of a great city.  In
one enclosure is a bear, who climbs a pole to get cake and gingerbread
from the spectators.  Elsewhere, a circular building, with compartments
for lions, wolves, and tigers.  In another part of the garden is a colony
of monkeys, the skeleton of an elephant, birds of all kinds.  Swans and
various rare water-fowl were swimming on a piece of water, which was
green, by the by, and when the fowls dived they stirred up black mud.  A
stork was parading along the margin, with melancholy strides of its long
legs, and came slowly towards us, as if for companionship.  In one
apartment was an obstreperously noisy society of parrots and macaws, most
gorgeous and diversified of hue.  These different colonies of birds and
beasts were scattered about in various parts of the grounds, so that you
came upon them unexpectedly.  Also, there were archery and
shooting-grounds, and a sewing.  A theatre, also, at which a rehearsal
was going on,--we standing at one of the doors, and looking in towards the
dusky stage where the company, in their ordinary dresses, were rehearsing
something that had a good deal of dance and action in it.  In the open
air there was an arrangement of painted scenery representing a wide
expanse of mountains, with a city at their feet, and before it the sea,
with actual water, and large vessels upon it, the vessels having only the
side that would be presented to the spectator.  But the scenery was so
good that at a first casual glance I almost mistook it for reality.
There was a refreshment-room, with drinks and cakes and pastry, but, so
far as I saw, no substantial victual.  About in the centre of the garden
there was an actual, homely-looking, small dwelling-house, where perhaps
the overlookers of the place live.  Now this might be wrought, in an
imaginative description, into a pleasant sort of a fool's paradise, where
all sorts of unreal delights should cluster round some suitable
personage; and it would relieve, in a very odd and effective way, the
stern realities of life on the outside of the garden-walls.  I saw a
little girl, simply dressed, who seemed to have her habitat within the
grounds.  There was also a daguerreotypist, with his wife and family,
carrying on his business in a shanty, and perhaps having his home in its
inner room.  He seemed to be an honest, intelligent, pleasant young man,
and his wife a pleasant woman; and I had J-----'s daguerreotype taken for
three shillings, in a little gilded frame.  In the description of the
garden, the velvet turf, of a charming verdure, and the shrubbery and
shadowy walks and large trees, and the slopes and inequalities of ground,
must not be forgotten.  In one place there was a maze and labyrinth,
where a person might wander a long while in the vain endeavor to get out,
although all the time looking at the exterior garden, over the low hedges
that border the walks of the maze.  And this is like the inappreciable
difficulties that often beset us in life.

This is an atom: 
I will see it again before long, and get some additional record of it.

This is an atom: 
August 10th.--We went to the Isle of Man, a few weeks ago, where S-----
and the children spent a fortnight.  I spent two Sundays with them.

This is an atom: 
I never saw anything prettier than the little church of Kirk Madden
there.  It stands in a perfect seclusion of shadowy trees,--a plain
little church, that would not be at all remarkable in another situation,
but is most picturesque in its solitude and bowery environment.  The
churchyard is quite full and overflowing with graves, and extends down
the gentle slope of a hill, with a dark mass of shadow above it.  Some of
the tombstones are flat on the ground, some erect, or laid horizontally
on low pillars or masonry.  There were no very old dates on any of these
stones; for the climate soon effaces inscriptions, and makes a stone of
fifty years look as old as one of five hundred,--unless it be slate, or
something harder than the usual red freestone.  There was an old Runic
monument, however, near the centre of the churchyard, that had some
strange sculpture on it, and an inscription still legible by persons
learned in such matters.  Against the tower of the church, too, there is
a circular stone, with carving on it, said to be of immemorial antiquity.
There is likewise a tall marble monument, as much as fifty feet high,
erected some years ago to the memory of one of the Athol family by his
brother-officers of a local regiment of which he was colonel.  At one of
the side-entrances of the church, and forming the threshold within the
thickness of the wall, so that the feet of all who enter must tread on
it, is a flat tombstone of somebody who felt himself a sinner, no doubt,
and desired to be thus trampled upon.  The stone is much worn.

This is an atom: 
The structure is extremely plain inside and very small.  On the walls,
over the pews, are several monumental sculptures,--a quite elaborate one
to a Colonel Murray, of the Coldstreamn Guards; his military profession
being designated by banners and swords in marble.--Another was to a
farmer.

This is an atom: 
On one side of the church-tower there was a little penthouse, or
lean-to,--merely a stone roof, about three or four feet high, and
supported by a single pillar, beneath which was once deposited the bier.

This is an atom: 
I have let too much time pass before attempting to record my impressions
of the Isle of Man; but, as regards this church, no description can come
up to its quiet beauty, its seclusion, and its every requisite for an
English country church.

This is an atom: 
Last Sunday I went to Eastham, and, entering the churchyard, sat down on
a tombstone under the yew-tree which has been known for centuries as the
Great Tree of Eastham.  Some of the village people were sitting on the
graves near the door; and an old woman came towards me, and said, in a
low, kindly, admonishing tone, that I must not let the sexton see me,
because he would not allow any one to be there in sacrament-time.  I
inquired why she and her companions were there, and she said they were
waiting for the sacrament.  So I thanked her, gave her a sixpence, and
departed.  Close under the eaves, I saw two upright stones, in memory of
two old servants of the Stanley family,--one over ninety, and the other
over eighty years of age.

This is an atom: 
August 12th.--J----- and I went to Birkenhead Park yesterday.  There is a
large ornamental gateway to the Park, and the grounds within are neatly
laid out, with borders of shrubbery.  There is a sheet of water, with
swans and other aquatic fowl, which swim about, and are fed with dainties
by the visitors.  Nothing can be more beautiful than a swan.  It is the
ideal of a goose,--a goose beautified and beatified.  There were not a
great many visitors, but some children were dancing on the green, and a
few lover-like people straying about.  I think the English behave better
than the Americans at similar places.

This is an atom: 
There was a camera-obscure, very wretchedly indistinct.  At the
refreshment-room were ginger-beer and British wines.

This is an atom: 
August 21st.--I was in the Crown Court on Saturday, sitting in the
sheriff's seat.  The judge was Baron ------, an old gentleman of sixty,
with very large, long features.  His wig helped him to look like some
strange kind of animal,--very queer, but yet with a sagacious, and, on
the whole, beneficent aspect.  During the session some mischievous young
barrister occupied himself with sketching the judge in pencil; and, being
handed about, it found its way to me.  It was very like and very
laughable, but hardly caricatured.  The judicial wig is an exceedingly
odd affair; and as it covers both ears, it would seem intended to prevent
his Lordship, and justice in his person, from hearing any of the case on
either side, that thereby he may decide the better.  It is like the old
idea of blindfolding the statue of Justice.

This is an atom: 
It seems to me there is less formality, less distance between the judge,
jury, witnesses, and bar, in the English courts than in our own.  The
judge takes a very active part in the trial, constantly asking a question
of the witness on the stand, making remarks on the conduct of the trial,
putting in his word on all occasions, and allowing his own sense of the
matter in hand to be pretty plainly seen; so that, before the trial is
over, and long before his own charge is delivered, he must have exercised
a very powerful influence over the minds of the jury.  All this is done,
not without dignity, yet in a familiar kind of way.  It is a sort of
paternal supervision of the whole matter, quite unlike the cold awfulness
of an American judge.  But all this may be owing partly to the personal
characteristics of Baron ------.  It appeared to me, however, that, from
the closer relations of all parties, truth was likely to be arrived at
and justice to be done.  As an innocent man, I should not be afraid to be
tried by Baron ------.

This is an atom: 
EATON HALL.

This is an atom: 
August 24th.--I went to Eaton Hall yesterday with my wife and Mr. G. P.
Bradford, via Chester.  On our way, at the latter place, we visited St.
John's Church.  It is built of the same red freestone as the cathedral,
and looked exceedingly antique, and venerable; this kind of stone, from
its softness, and its liability to be acted upon by the weather, being
liable to an early decay.  Nevertheless, I believe the church was built
above a thousand years ago,--some parts of it, at least,--and the surface
of the tower and walls is worn away and hollowed in shallow sweeps by the
hand of Time.  There were broken niches in several places, where statues
had formerly stood.  All, except two or three, had fallen or crumbled
away, and those which remained were much damaged.  The face and details
of the figure were almost obliterated.  There were many gravestones round
the church, but none of them of any antiquity.  Probably, as the names
become indistinguishable on the older stones, the graves are dug over
again, and filled with new occupants and covered with new stones, or
perhaps with the old ones newly inscribed.

This is an atom: 
Closely connected with the church was the clergyman's house, a
comfortable-looking residence; and likewise in the churchyard, with
tombstones all about it, even almost at the threshold, so that the
doorstep itself might have been a tombstone, was another house, of
respectable size and aspect.  We surmised that this might be the sexton's
dwelling, but it proved not to be so; and a woman, answering our knock,
directed us to the place where he might be found.  So Mr. Bradford and I
went in search of him, leaving S----- seated on a tombstone.  The sexton
was a jolly-looking, ruddy-faced man, a mechanic of some sort,
apparently, and he followed us to the churchyard with much alacrity.  We
found S----- standing at a gateway, which opened into the most ancient,
and now quite ruinous, part of the church, the present edifice covering
much less ground than it did some centuries ago.  We went through this
gateway, and found ourselves in an enclosure of venerable walls, open to
the sky, with old Norman arches standing about, beneath the loftiest of
which the sexton told us the high altar used to stand.  Of course, there
were weeds and ivy growing in the crevices, but not so abundantly as I
have seen them elsewhere.  The sexton pointed out a piece of a statue
that had once stood in one of the niches, and which he himself, I think,
had dug up from several feet below the earth; also, in a niche of the
walls, high above our heads, he showed us an ancient wooden coffin, hewn
out of a solid log of oak, the hollow being made rudely in the shape of a
human figure.  This too had been dug up, and nobody knew how old it was.
While we looked at all this solemn old trumpery, the curate, quite a
young man, stood at the back door of his house, elevated considerably
above the ruins, with his young wife (I presume) and a friend or two,
chatting cheerfully among themselves.  It was pleasant to see them there.
After examining the ruins, we went inside of the church, and found it a
dim and dusky old place, quite paved over with tombstones, not an inch of
space being left in the aisles or near the altar, or in any nook or
corner, uncovered by a tombstone.  There were also mural monuments and
escutcheons, and close against the wall lay the mutilated statue of a
Crusader, with his legs crossed, in the style which one has so often read
about.  The old fellow seemed to have been represented in chain armor;
but he had been more battered and bruised since death than even during
his pugnacious life, and his nose was almost knocked away.  This figure
had been dug up many years ago, and nobody knows whom it was meant to
commemorate.

This is an atom: 
The nave of the church is supported by two rows of Saxon pillars, not
very lofty, but six feet six inches (so the sexton says) in diameter.
They are covered with plaster, which was laid on ages ago, and is now so
hard and smooth that I took the pillars to be really composed of solid
shafts of gray stone.  But, at one end of the church, the plaster had
been removed from two of the pillars, in order to discover whether they
were still sound enough to support the building; and they prove to be
made of blocks of red freestone, just as sound as when it came from the
quarry; for though this stone soon crumbles in the open air, it is as
good as indestructible when sheltered from the weather.  It looked very
strange to see the fresh hue of these two pillars amidst the dingy
antiquity of the rest of the structure.

This is an atom: 
The body of the church is covered with pews, the wooden enclosures of
which seemed of antique fashion.  There were also modern stoves; but the
sexton said it was very cold there, in spite of the stoves.  It had, I
must say, a disagreeable odor pervading it, in which the dead people of
long ago had doubtless some share,--a musty odor, by no means amounting
to a stench, but unpleasant, and, I should think, unwholesome.  Old
wood-work, and old stones, and antiquity of all kinds, moral and
physical, go to make up this smell.  I observed it in the cathedral, and
Chester generally has it, especially under the Rows.  After all, the
necessary damp and lack of sunshine, in such a shadowy old church as
this, have probably more to do with it than the dead people have;
although I did think the odor was particularly strong over some of the
tombstones.  Not having shillings to give the sexton, we were forced to
give him half a crown.

This is an atom: 
The Church of St. John is outside of the city walls.  Entering the East
gate, we walked awhile under the Rows, bought our tickets for Eaton Hall
and its gardens, and likewise some playthings for the children; for this
old city of Chester seems to me to possess an unusual number of
toy-shops.  Finally we took a cab, and drove to the Hall, about four
miles distant, nearly the whole of the way lying through the wooded Park.
There are many sorts of trees, making up a wilderness, which looked not
unlike the woods of our own Concord, only less wild.  The English oak is
not a handsome tree, being short and sturdy, with a round, thick mass of
foliage, lying all within its own bounds.  It was a showery day.  Had
there been any sunshine, there might doubtless have been many beautiful
effects of light and shadow in these woods.  We saw one or two herds of
deer, quietly feeding, a hundred yards or so distant.  They appeared to
be somewhat wilder than cattle, but, I think, not much wilder than sheep.
Their ancestors have probably been in a half-domesticated state,
receiving food at the hands of man, in winter, for centuries.  There is a
kind of poetry in this, quite as much as if they were really wild deer,
such as their forefathers were, when Hugh Lupus used to hunt them.

This is an atom: 
Our miserable cab drew up at the steps of Eaton Hall, and, ascending
under the portico, the door swung silently open, and we were received
very civilly by two old men,--one, a tall footman in livery; the other,
of higher grade, in plain clothes.  The entrance-hall is very spacious,
and the floor is tessellated or somehow inlaid with marble.  There was
statuary in marble on the floor, and in niches stood several figures in
antique armor, of various dates; some with lances, and others with
battle-axes and swords.  There was a two-handed sword, as much as six
feet long; but not nearly so ponderous as I have supposed this kind of
weapon to be, from reading of it.  I could easily have brandished it.

This is an atom: 
I don't think I am a good sight-seer; at least, I soon get satisfied with
looking at the sights, and wish to go on to the next.

This is an atom: 
The plainly dressed old man now led us into a long corridor, which goes,
I think, the whole length of the house, about five hundred feet, arched
all the way, and lengthened interminably by a looking-glass at the end,
in which I saw our own party approaching like a party of strangers.  But
I have so often seen this effect produced in dry-goods stores and
elsewhere, that I was not much impressed.  There were family portraits
and other pictures, and likewise pieces of statuary, along this arched
corridor; and it communicated with a chapel with a scriptural
altar-piece, copied from Rubens, and a picture of St. Michael and the
Dragon, and two, or perhaps three, richly painted windows.  Everything
here is entirely new and fresh, this part having been repaired, and never
yet inhabited by the family.  This brand-newness makes it much less
effective than if it had been lived in; and I felt pretty much as if I
were strolling through any other renewed house.  After all, the utmost
force of man can do positively very little towards making grand things or
beautiful things.  The imagination can do so much more, merely on
shutting one's eyes, that the actual effect seems meagre; so that a new
house, unassociated with the past, is exceedingly unsatisfactory,
especially when you have heard that the wealth mud skill of man has here
done its best.  Besides, the rooms, as we saw them, did not look by any
means their best, the carpets not being down, and the furniture being
covered with protective envelopes.  However, rooms cannot be seen to
advantage by daylight; it being altogether essential to the effect, that
they should be illuminated by artificial light, which takes them somewhat
out of the region of bare reality.  Nevertheless, there was undoubtedly
great splendor, for the details of which I refer to the guide-book.
Among the family portraits, there was one of a lady famous for her
beautiful hand; and she was holding it up to notice in the funniest way,
--and very beautiful it certainly was.  The private apartments of the
family were not shown us.  I should think it impossible for the owner of
this house to imbue it with his personality to such a degree as to feel
it to be his home.  It must be like a small lobster in a shell much too
large for him.

This is an atom: 
After seeing what was to be seen of the rooms, we visited the gardens, in
which are noble conservatories and hot-houses, containing all manner of
rare and beautiful flowers, and tropical fruits.  I noticed some large
pines, looking as if they were really made of gold.  The gardener
(under-gardener I suppose he was) who showed this part of the spectacle
was very intelligent as well as kindly, and seemed to take an interest in
his business.  He gave S----- a purple everlasting flower, which will
endure a great many years, as a memento of our visit to Eaton Hall.
Finally, we took a view of the front of the edifice, which is very fine,
and much more satisfactory than the interior,--and returned to Chester.

This is an atom: 
We strolled about under the unsavory Rows, sometimes scudding from side
to side of the street, through the shower; took lunch in a confectioner's
shop, and drove to the railway station in time for the three-o'clock
train.  It looked picturesque to see two little girls, hand in hand,
racing along the ancient passages of the Rows; but Chester has a very
evil smell.

This is an atom: 
At the railroad station, S----- saw a small edition of "Twice-Told
Tales," forming a volume of the Cottage Library; and, opening it, there
was the queerest imaginable portrait of myself,--so very queer that we
could not but buy it.  The shilling edition of "The Scarlet Letter" and
"Seven Gables" are at all the book-stalls and shop-windows; but so is
"The Lamplighter," and still more trashy books.

This is an atom: 
August 26th.--All past affairs, all home conclusions, all people whom I
have known in America and meet again here, are strangely compelled to
undergo a new trial.  It is not that they suffer by comparison with
circumstances of English life and forms of English manhood or womanhood;
but, being free from my old surroundings, and the inevitable prejudices
of home, I decide upon them absolutely.

This is an atom: 
I think I neglected to record that I saw Miss Martineau a few weeks
since.  She is a large, robust, elderly woman, and plainly dressed; but
withal she has so kind, cheerful, and intelligent a face that she is
pleasanter to look at than most beauties.  Her hair is of a decided gray,
and she does not shrink from calling herself old.  She is the most
continual talker I ever heard; it is really like the babbling of a brook,
and very lively and sensible too; and all the while she talks, she moves
the bowl of her ear-trumpet from one auditor to another, so that it
becomes quite an organ of intelligence and sympathy between her and
yourself.  The ear-trumpet seems a sensible part of her, like the
antennae of some insects.  If you have any little remark to make, you
drop it in; and she helps you to make remarks by this delicate little
appeal of the trumpet, as she slightly directs it towards you; and if you
have nothing to say, the appeal is not strong enough to embarrass you.
All her talk was about herself and her affairs; but it did not seem like
egotism, because it was so cheerful and free from morbidness.  And this
woman is an Atheist, and thinks that the principle of life will become
extinct when her body is laid in the grave!  I will not think so; were it
only for her sake.  What! only a few weeds to spring out of her
mortality, instead of her intellect and sympathies flowering and fruiting
forever!

This is an atom: 
September 13th.--My family went to Rhyl last Thursday, and on Saturday I
joined them there, in company with O'Sullivan, who arrived in the Behama
from Lisbon that morning.  We went by way of Chester, and found S-----
waiting for us at the Rhyl station.  Rhyl is a most uninteresting place,
--a collection of new lodging-houses and hotels, on a long sand-beach,
which the tide leaves bare almost to the horizon.  The sand is by no
means a marble pavement, but sinks under the foot, and makes very heavy
walking; but there is a promenade in front of the principal range of
houses, looking on the sea, whereon we have rather better footing.
Almost all the houses were full, and S----- had taken a parlor and two
bedrooms, and is living after the English fashion, providing her own
table, lights, fuel, and everything.  It is very awkward to our American
notions; but there is an independence about it, which I think must make
it agreeable on better acquaintance.  But the place is certainly
destitute of attraction, and life seems to pass very heavily.  The
English do not appear to have a turn for amusing themselves.

This is an atom: 
Sunday was a bright and hot day, and in the forenoon I set out on a walk,
not well knowing whither, over a very dusty road, with not a particle of
shade along its dead level.  The Welsh mountains were before me, at the
distance of three or four miles,--long ridgy hills, descending pretty
abruptly upon the plain; on either side of the road, here and there, an
old whitewashed, thatched stone cottage, or a stone farm-house, with an
aspect of some antiquity.  I never suffered so much before, on this side
of the water, from heat and dust, and should probably have turned back
had I not espied the round towers and walls of an old castle at some
distance before me.  Having looked at a guide-book, previously to setting
out, I knew that this must be Rhyddlan Castle, about three miles from
Rhyl; so I plodded on, and by and by entered an antiquated village, on
one side of which the castle stood.  This Welsh village is very much like
the English villages, with narrow streets and mean houses or cottages,
built in blocks, and here and there a larger house standing alone;
everything far more compact than in our rural villages, and with no
grassy street-margin nor trees; aged and dirty also, with dirty children
staring at the passenger, and an undue supply of mean inns; most, or many
of the men in breeches, and some of the women, especially the elder ones,
in black beaver hats.  The streets were paved with round pebbles, and
looked squalid and ugly.

This is an atom: 
The children and grown people stared lazily at me as I passed, but showed
no such alert and vivacious curiosity as a community of Yankees would
have done.  I turned up a street that led me to the castle, which looked
very picturesque close at hand,--more so than at a distance, because the
towers and walls have not a sufficiently broken outline against the sky.
There are several round towers at the angles of the wall very large in
their circles, built of gray stone, crumbling, ivy-grown, everything that
one thinks of in an old ruin.  I could not get into the inner space of
the castle without climbing over a fence, or clambering down into the
moat; so I contented myself with walking round it, and viewing it from
the outside.  Through the gateway I saw a cow feeding on the green grass
in the inner court of the castle.  In one of the walls there was a large
triangular gap, where perhaps the assailants had made a breach.  Of
course there were weeds on the ruinous top of the towers, and along the
summit of the wall.  This was the first castle built by Edward I. in
Wales, and he resided here during the erection of Conway Castle, and here
Queen Eleanor gave birth to a princess.  Some few years since a meeting
of Welsh bards was held within it.

This is an atom: 
After viewing it awhile, and listening to the babble of some children who
lay on the grass near by, I resumed my walk, and, meeting a Welshman in
the village street, I asked him my nearest way back to Rhyl.  "Dim
Sassenach," said he, after a pause.  How odd that an hour or two on the
railway should have brought me amongst a people who speak no English!
Just below the castle, there is an arched stone bridge over the river
Clwyd, and the best view of the edifice is from hence.  It stands on a
gentle eminence, commanding the passage of the river, and two twin round
towers rise close beside one another, whence, I suppose, archers have
often drawn their bows against the wild Welshmen, on the river-banks.
Behind was the line of mountains; and this was the point of defence
between the hill country and the lowlands.  On the bridge stood a good
many idle Welshmen, leaning over the parapet, and looking at some small
vessels that had come up the river from the sea.  There was the frame of
a new vessel on the stocks near by.

This is an atom: 
As I returned, on my way home, I again inquired my way of a man in
breeches, who, I found, could speak English very well.  He was kind, and
took pains to direct me, giving me the choice of three ways, viz. the one
by which I came, another across the fields, and a third by the embankment
along the river-side.  I chose the latter, and so followed the course of
the Clwyd, which is very ugly, with a tidal flow and wide marshy banks.
On its farther side was Rhyddlan marsh, where a battle was fought between
the Welsh and Saxons a thousand years ago.  I have forgotten to mention
that the castle and its vicinity was the scene of the famous battle of
the fiddlers, between De Blandeville, Earl of Chester, and the Welsh,
about the time of the Conqueror.

This is an atom: 
CONWAY CASTLE.

This is an atom: 
September 13th.--On Monday we went with O'Sullivan to Conway by rail.
Certainly this must be the most perfect specimen of a ruinous old castle
in the whole world; it quite fills up one's idea.  We first walked round
the exterior of the wall, at the base of which are hovels, with dirty
children playing about them, and pigs rambling along, and squalid women
visible in the doorways; but all these things melt into the
picturesqueness of the scene, and do not harm it.  The whole town of
Conway is built in what was once the castle-yard, and the whole circuit
of the wall is still standing in a delightful state of decay.  At the
angles, and at regular intervals, there are round towers, having half
their circle on the outside of the walls, and half within.  Most of these
towers have a great crack pervading them irregularly from top to bottom;
the ivy hangs upon them,--the weeds grow on the tops.  Gateways, three or
four of them, open through the walls, and streets proceed from them into
the town.  At some points, very old cottages or small houses are close
against the sides, and, old as they are, they must have been built after
the whole structure was a ruin.  In one place I saw the sign of an
alehouse painted on the gray stones of one of the old round towers.  As
we entered one of the gates, after making the entire circuit, we saw an
omnibus coming down the street towards us, with its horn sounding.
Llandudno was its place of destination; and, knowing no more about it
than that it was four miles off, we took our seats.  Llandudno is a
watering-village at the base of the Great Orme's Head, at the mouth of
the Conway River.  In this omnibus there were two pleasant-looking girls,
who talked Welsh together,--a guttural, childish kind of a babble.
Afterwards we got into conversation with them, and found them very
agreeable.  One of them was reading Tupper's "Proverbial Philosophy."  On
reaching Llandudno, S----- waited at the hotel, while O'Sullivan, U----,
and I ascended the Great Orme's Head.  There are copper-mines here, and
we heard of a large cave, with stalactites, but did not go so far as
that.  We found the old shaft of a mine, however, and threw stones down
it, and counted twenty before we heard them strike the bottom.  At the
base of the Head, on the side opposite the village, we saw a small church
with a broken roof, and horizontal gravestones of slate within the stone
enclosure around it.  The view from the hill was most beautiful,--a blue
summer sea, with the distant trail of smoke from a steamer, and many
snowy sails; in another direction the mountains, near and distant, some
of them with clouds below their peaks.

This is an atom: 
We went to one of the mines which are still worked, and boys came running
to meet us with specimens of the copper ore for sale.  The miners were
not now hoisting ore from the shaft, but were washing and selecting the
valuable fragments from great heaps of crumbled stone and earth.  All
about this spot there are shafts and well-holes, looking fearfully deep
and black, and without the slightest protection, so that we might just as
easily have walked into them as not.  Having examined these matters
sufficiently, we descended the hill towards the village, meeting parties
of visitors, mounted on donkeys, which is a much more sensible way of
ascending in a hot day than to walk.  On the sides and summit of the hill
we found yellow gorse,--heath of two colors, I think, and very
beautiful,--and here and there a harebell.  Owing to the long-continued
dry weather, the grass was getting withered and brown, though not so much
so as on American hill-pastures at this season.  Returning to the
village, we all went into a confectioner's shop, and made a good
luncheon.  The two prettiest young ladies whom I have seen in England
came into the shop and ate cakes while we were there.  They appeared to
be living together in a lodging-house, and ordered some of their
housekeeping articles from the confectioner.

This is an atom: 
Next we went into the village bazaar,--a sort of tent or open shop, full
of knick-knacks and gewgaws, and bought some playthings for the children.
At half past one we took our seats in the omnibus, to return to Conway.

This is an atom: 
We had as yet only seen the castle wall and the exterior of the castle;
now we were to see the inside.  Right at the foot of it an old woman has
her stand for the sale of lithographic views of Conway and other places;
but these views are ridiculously inadequate, so that we did not buy any
of them.  The admittance into the castle is by a wooden door of modern
construction, and the present seneschal is, I believe, the sexton of a
church.  He remembered me as having been there a month or two ago; and
probably, considering that I was already initiated, or else because he
had many other visitors, he left us to wander about the castle at will.
It is altogether impossible to describe Conway Castle.  Nothing ever can
have been so perfect in its own style, and for its own purposes, when it
was first built; and now nothing else can be so perfect as a picture of
ivy-grown, peaceful ruin.  The banqueting-hall, all open to the sky and
with thick curtains of ivy tapestrying the walls, and grass and weeds
growing on the arches that overpass it, is indescribably beautiful.  The
hearthstones of the great old fireplaces, all about the castle, seem to
be favorite spots for weeds to grow.  There are eight large round towers,
and out of four of them, I think, rise smaller towers, ascending to a
much greater height, and once containing winding staircases, all of which
are now broken, and inaccessible from below, though, in at least one of
the towers, the stairs seemed perfect, high aloft.  It must have been the
rudest violence that broke down these stairs; for each step was a thick
and heavy slab of stone, built into the wall of the tower.  There is no
such thing as a roof in any part; towers, hall, kitchen, all are open to
the sky.  One round tower, directly overhanging the railway, is so
shattered by the falling away of the lower part, that you can look quite
up into it and through it, while sitting in the cars; and yet it has
stood thus, without falling into complete ruin, for more than two hundred
years.  I think that it was in this tower that we found the castle oven,
an immense cavern, big enough to bake bread for an army.  The railway
passes exactly at the base of the high rock, on which this part of the
castle is situated, and goes into the town through a great arch that has
been opened in the castle wall.  The tubular bridge across the Conway has
been built in a style that accords with the old architecture, and I
observed that one little sprig of ivy had rooted itself in the new
structure.

This is an atom: 
There are numberless intricate passages in the thickness of the castle
walls, forming communications between tower and tower,--damp, chill
passages, with rough stone on either hand, darksome, and very likely
leading to dark pitfalls.  The thickness of the walls is amazing; and the
people of those days must have been content with very scanty light, so
small were the apertures,--sometimes merely slits and loopholes,
glimmering through many feet of thickness of stone.  One of the towers
was said to have been the residence of Queen Eleanor; and this was better
lighted than the others, containing an oriel-window, looking out of a
little oratory, as it seemed to be, with groined arches and traces of
ornamental sculpture, so that we could dress up some imperfect image of a
queenly chamber, though the tower was roofless and floorless.  There was
another pleasant little windowed nook, close beside the oratory, where
the Queen might have sat sewing or looking down the river Conway at the
picturesque headlands towards the sea.  We imagined her stately figure in
antique robes, standing beneath the groined arches of the oratory.  There
seem to have been three chambers, one above another, in these towers, and
the one in which was the embowed window was the middle one.  I suppose
the diameter of each of these circular rooms could not have been more
than twenty feet on the inside.  All traces of wood-work and iron-work
are quite gone from the whole castle.  These are said to have been taken
away by a Lord Conway in the reign of Charles II.  There is a grassy
space under the windows of Queen Eleanor's tower,--a sort of outwork of
the castle, where probably, when no enemy was near, the Queen used to
take the open air in summer afternoons like this.  Here we sat down on
the grass of the ruined wall, and agreed that nothing in the world could
be so beautiful and picturesque as Conway Castle, and that never could
there have been so fit a time to see it as this sunny, quiet, lovely
afternoon.  Sunshine adapts itself to the character of a ruin in a
wonderful way; it does not "flout the ruins gray," as Scott says, but
sympathizes with their decay, and saddens itself for their sake.  It
beautifies the ivy too.

This is an atom: 
We saw, at the corner of this grass-plot around Queen Eleanor's tower, a
real trunk of a tree of ivy, with so stalwart a stem, and such a vigorous
grasp of its strong branches, that it would be a very efficient support
to the wall, were it otherwise inclined to fall.  O that we could have
ivy in America!  What is there to beautify us when our time of ruin
comes?

This is an atom: 
Before departing, we made the entire circuit of the castle on its walls,
and O'Sullivan and I climbed by a ladder to the top of one of the towers.
While there, we looked down into the street beneath, and saw a
photographist preparing to take a view of the castle, and calling out to
some little girl in some niche or on some pinnacle of the walls to stand
still that he might catch her figure and face.  I think it added to the
impressiveness of the old castle, to see the streets and the
kitchen-gardens and the homely dwellings that had grown up within the
precincts of this feudal fortress, and the people of to-day following
their little businesses about it.  This does not destroy the charm; but
tourists and idle visitors do impair it.  The earnest life of to-day,
however, petty and homely as it may be, has a right to its place
alongside of what is left of the life of other days; and if it be vulgar
itself, it does not vulgarize the scene.  But tourists do vulgarize it;
and I suppose we did so, just like others.

This is an atom: 
We took the train back to Rhyl, where we arrived at about four o'clock,
and, having dined, we again took the rail for Chester, and thence to Rock
Park (that is, O'Sullivan and I), and reached home at about eleven
o'clock.

This is an atom: 
Yesterday, September 13th, I began to wear a watch from Bennet's, 65
Cheapside, London.  W. C. Bennet warrants it as the best watch which they
can produce.  If it prove as good and as durable as he prophesies, J-----
will find it a perfect time-keeper long after his father has done with
Time.  If I had not thought of his wearing it hereafter, I should have
been content with a much inferior one.  No. 39,620.

This is an atom: 
September 20th.--I went back to Rhyl last Friday in the steamer.  We
arrived at the landing-place at nearly four o'clock, having started at
twelve, and I walked thence to our lodgings, 18 West Parade.  The
children and their mother were all gone out, and I sat some time in our
parlor before anybody came.  The next morning I made an excursion in the
omnibus as far as Ruthin, passing through Rhyddlan, St. Asaph, Denbigh,
and reaching Ruthin at one o'clock.  All these are very ancient places.
St. Asaph has a cathedral which is not quite worthy of that name, but is
a very large and stately church in excellent repair.  Its square
battlemented tower has a very fine appearance, crowning the clump of
village houses on the hill-top, as you approach from Rhyddlan.  The
ascent of the hill is very steep; so it is at Denbigh and at Ruthin,--the
steepest streets, indeed, that I ever climbed.  Denbigh is a place of
still more antique aspect than St. Asaph; it looks, I think, even older
than Chester, with its gabled houses, many of their windows opening on
hinges, and their fronts resting on pillars, with an open porch beneath.
The castle makes an admirably ruinous figure on the hill, higher than the
village.  I had come hither with the purpose of inspecting it, but as it
began to rain just then, I concluded to get into the omnibus and go to
Ruthin.  There was another steep ascent from the commencement of the long
street of Ruthin, till I reached the market-place, which is of nearly
triangular shape, and an exceedingly old-looking place.  Houses of stone
or plastered brick; one or two with timber frames; the roofs of an uneven
line, and bulging out or sinking in; the slates moss-grown.  Some of them
have two peaks and even three in a row, fronting on the streets, and
there is a stone market-house with a table of regulations.  In this
market-place there is said to be a stone on which King Arthur beheaded
one of his enemies; but this I did not see.  All these villages were very
lively, as the omnibus drove in; and I rather imagine it was market-day
in each of them,--there being quite a bustle of Welsh people.  The old
women came round the omnibus courtesying and intimating their willingness
to receive alms,--witch-like women, such as one sees in pictures or reads
of in romances, and very unlike anything feminine in America.  Their
style of dress cannot have changed for centuries.  It was quite
unexpected to me to hear Welsh so universally and familiarly spoken.
Everybody spoke it.  The omnibus-driver could speak but imperfect
English; there was a jabber of Welsh all through the streets and
market-places; and it flowed out with a freedom quite different from the
way in which they expressed themselves in English.  I had had an idea
that Welsh was spoken rather as a freak and in fun than as a native
language; it was so strange to find another language the people's actual
and earnest medium of thought within so short a distance of England.  But
English is scarcely more known to the body of the Welsh people than to
the peasantry of France.  However, they sometimes pretend to ignorance,
when they might speak it fairly enough.

This is an atom: 
I took luncheon at the hotel where the omnibus stopped, and then went to
search out the castle.  It appears to have been once extensive, but the
remains of it are now very few, except a part of the external wall.
Whatever other portion may still exist, has been built into a modern
castellated mansion, which has risen within the wide circuit of the
fortress,--a handsome and spacious edifice of red freestone, with a high
tower, on which a flag was flying.  The grounds were well laid out in
walks, and really I think the site of the castle could not have been
turned to better account.  I am getting tired of antiquity.  It is
certainly less interesting in the long run than novelty; and so I was
well content with the fresh, warm, red hue of the modern house, and the
unworn outline of its walls, and its cheerful, large windows; and was
willing that the old ivy-grown ruins should exist now only to contrast
with the modernisms.  These ancient walls, by the by, are of immense
thickness.  There is a passage through the interior of a portion of them,
the width from this interior passage to the outer one being fifteen feet
on one side, and I know not how much on the other.

This is an atom: 
It continued showery all day; and the omnibus was crowded.  I had chosen
the outside from Rhyl to Denbigh, but, all the rest of the journey,
imprisoned myself within.  On our way home, an old lady got into the
omnibus,--a lady of tremendous rotundity; and as she tumbled from the
door to the farthest part of the carriage, she kept advising all the rest
of the passengers to get out.  "I don't think there will be much rain,
gentlemen," quoth she, "you'll be much more comfortable on the outside."
As none of us complied, she glanced along the seats.  "What! are you all
Saas'uach?" she inquired.  As we drove along, she talked Welsh with great
fluency to one of the passengers, a young woman with a baby, and to as
many others as could understand her.  It has a strange, wild sound, like
a language half blown away by the wind.  The lady's English was very
good; but she probably prided herself on her proficiency in Welsh.  My
excursion to-day had been along the valley of the Clwyd, a very rich and
fertile tract of country.

This is an atom: 
The next day we all took a long walk on the beach, picking up shells.

This is an atom: 
On Monday we took an open carriage and drove to Rhyddlan; whence we sent
back the carriage, meaning to walk home along the embankment of the river
Clwyd, after inspecting the castle.  The fortress is very ruinous, having
been dismantled by the Parliamentarians.  There are great gaps,--two, at
least, in the walls that connect the round towers, of which there were
six, one on each side of a gateway in front, and the same at a gateway
towards the river, where there is a steep descent to a wall and square
tower, at the water-side.  Great pains and a great deal of gunpowder must
have been used in converting this castle into a ruin.  There were one or
two fragments lying where they had fallen more than two hundred years
ago, which, though merely a conglomeration of small stones and mortar,
were just as hard as if they had been solid masses of granite.  The
substantial thickness of the walls is composed of these agglomerated
small stones and mortar, the casing being hewn blocks of red freestone.
This is much worn away by the weather, wherever it has been exposed to
the air; but, under shelter, it looks as if it might have been hewn only
a year or two ago.  Each of the round towers had formerly a small
staircase turret rising beside and ascending above it, in which a warder
might be posted, but they have all been so battered and shattered that it
is impossible for an uninstructed observer to make out a satisfactory
plan of then.  The interior of each tower was a small room, not more than
twelve or fifteen feet across; and of these there seem to have been three
stories, with loop-holes for archery and not much other light than what
came through them.  Then there are various passages and nooks and corners
and square recesses in the stone, some of which must have been intended
for dungeons, and the ugliest and gloomiest dungeons imaginable, for they
could not have had any light or air.  There is not, the least, splinter
of wood-work remaining in any part of the castle,--nothing but bare
stone, and a little plaster in one or two places, on the wall.  In the
front gateway we looked at the groove on each side, in which the
portcullis used to rise and fall; and in each of the contiguous round
towers there was a loop-hole, whence an enemy on the outer side of the
portcullis might be shot through with an arrow.

This is an atom: 
The inner court-yard is a parallelogram, nearly a square, and is about
forty-five of my paces across.  It is entirely grass-grown, and vacant,
except for two or three trees that have been recently set out, and which
are surrounded with palings to keep away the cows that pasture in and
about the place.  No window looks from the walls or towers into this
court-yard; nor are there any traces of buildings having stood within the
enclosure, unless it be what looks something like the flue of a chimney
within one of the walls.  I should suppose, however, that there must have
been, when the castle was in its perfect state, a hall, a kitchen, and
other commodious apartments and offices for the King and his train, such
as there were at Conway and Beaumaris.  But if so, all fragments have
been carried away, and all hollows of the old foundations scrupulously
filled up.  The round towers could not have comprised all the
accommodation of the castle.  There is nothing more striking in these
ruins than to look upward from the crumbling base, and see flights of
stairs, still comparatively perfect, by which you might securely ascend
to the upper heights of the tower, although all traces of a staircase
have disappeared below, and the upper portion cannot be attained.  On
three sides of the fortress is a moat, about sixty feet wide, and cased
with stone.  It was probably of great depth in its day, but it is now
partly filled up with earth, and is quite dry and grassy throughout its
whole extent.  On the inner side of the moat was the outer wall of the
castle, portions of which still remain.  Between the outer wall and the
castle itself the space is also about sixty feet.

This is an atom: 
The day was cloudy and lowering, and there were several little
spatterings of rain, while we rambled about.  The two children ran
shouting hither and thither, and were continually clambering into
dangerous places, racing along ledges of broken wall.  At last they
altogether disappeared for a good while; their voices, which had
heretofore been plainly audible, were hushed, nor was there any answer
when we began to call them, while making ready for our departure.  But
they finally appeared, coming out of the moat, where they had been
picking and eating blackberries,--which, they said, grew very plentifully
there, and which they were very reluctant to leave.  Before quitting the
castle, I must not forget the ivy, which makes a perfect tapestry over a
large portion of the walls.

This is an atom: 
We walked about the village, which is old and ugly; small, irregular
streets, contriving to be intricate, though there are few of them; mean
houses, joining to each other.  We saw, in the principal one, the
parliament house in which Edward I. gave a Charter, or allowed rights of
some kind to his Welsh subjects.  The ancient part of its wall is
entirely distinguishable from what has since been built upon it.

This is an atom: 
Thence we set out to walk along the embankment, although the sky looked
very threatening.  The wind, however, was so strong, and had such a full
sweep at us, on the top of the bank, that we decided on taking a path
that led from it across the moor.  But we soon had cause to repent of
this; for, which way soever we turned, we found ourselves cut off by a
ditch or a little stream; so that here we were, fairly astray on Rhyddlan
moor, the old battle-field of the Saxons and Britons, and across which, I
suppose, the fiddlers and mountebanks had marched to the relief of the
Earl of Chester.  Anon, too, it began to shower; and it was only after
various leaps and scramblings that we made our way to a large farm-house,
and took shelter under a cart-shed.  The back of the house to which we
gained access was very dirty and ill-kept; some dirty children peeped at
us as we approached, and nobody had the civility to ask us in; so we took
advantage of the first cessation of the shower to resume our way.  We
were shortly overtaken by a very intelligent-looking and civil man, who
seemed to have come from Rhyddlan, and said he was going to Rhyl.  We
followed his guidance over stiles and along hedge-row paths which we
never could have threaded rightly by ourselves.

This is an atom: 
By and by our kind guide had to stop at an intermediate farm; but he gave
us full directions how to proceed, and we went on till it began to shower
again pretty briskly, and we took refuge in a little bit of old stone
cottage, which, small as it was, had a greater antiquity than any mansion
in America.  The door was open, and as we approached, we saw several
children gazing at us; and their mother, a pleasant-looking woman, who
seemed rather astounded at the visit that was about to befall her, tried
to draw a tattered curtain over a part of her interior, which she fancied
even less fit to be seen than the rest.  To say the truth, the house was
not at all better than a pigsty; and while we sat there, a pig came
familiarly to the door, thrust in his snout, and seemed surprised that he
should be driven away, instead of being admitted as one of the family.
The floor was of brick; there was no ceiling, but only the peaked gable
overhead.  The room was kitchen, parlor, and, I suppose, bedroom for the
whole family; at all events, there was only the tattered curtain between
us and the sleeping accommodations.  The good woman either could not or
would not speak a word of English, only laughing when S----- said, "Dim
Sassenach?" but she was kind and hospitable, and found a chair for each
of us.  She had been making some bread, and the dough was on the dresser.
Life with these people is reduced to its simplest elements.  It is only a
pity that they cannot or do not choose to keep themselves cleaner.
Poverty, except in cities, need not be squalid.  When the shower abated a
little, we gave all the pennies we had to the children, and set forth
again.  By the by, there were several colored prints stuck up against the
walls, and there was a clock ticking in a corner and some paper-hangings
pinned upon the slanting roof.

This is an atom: 
It began to rain again before we arrived at Rhyl, and we were driven into
a small tavern.  After staying there awhile, we set forth between the
drops; but the rain fell still heavier, so that we were pretty well
damped before we got to our lodgings.  After dinner, I took the rail for
Chester and Rock Park, and S----- and the children and maid followed the
next day.

This is an atom: 
September 22d.--I dined on Wednesday evening at Mr. John Heywood's,
Norris Green.  Mr. Mouckton Mimes and lady were of the company.  Mr.
Mimes is a very agreeable, kindly man, resembling Longfellow a good deal
in personal appearance; and he promotes, by his genial manners, the same
pleasant intercourse which is so easily established with Longfellow.  He
is said to be a very kind patron of literary men, and to do a great deal
of good among young and neglected people of that class.  He is considered
one of the best conversationists at present in society: it may very well
be so; his style of talking being very simple and natural, anything but
obtrusive, so that you might enjoy its agreeableness without suspecting
it.  He introduced me to his wife (a daughter of Lord Crewe), with whom
and himself I had a good deal of talk.  Mr. Milnes told me that he owns
the land in Yorkshire, whence some of the pilgrims of the Mayflower
emigrated to Plymouth, and that Elder Brewster was the Postmaster of the
village. . . . He also said that in the next voyage of the Mayflower,
after she carried the Pilgrims, she was employed in transporting a cargo
of slaves from Africa,--to the West Indies, I suppose.  This is a queer
fact, and would be nuts for the Southerners.

This is an atom: 
Mem.--An American would never understand the passage in Bunyan about
Christian and Hopeful going astray along a by-path into the grounds of
Giant Despair,--from there being no stiles and by-paths in our country.

This is an atom: 
September 26th.--On Saturday evening my wife and I went to a soiree given
by the Mayor and Mrs. Lloyd at the Town Hall to receive the Earl of
Harrowby.  It was quite brilliant, the public rooms being really
magnificent, and adorned for the occasion with a large collection of
pictures, belonging to Mr. Naylor.  They were mostly, if not entirely, of
modern artists,--of Turner, Wilkie, Landseer, and others of the best
English painters.  Turner's seemed too ethereal to have been done by
mortal hands.

This is an atom: 
The British Scientific Association being now in session here, many
distinguished strangers were present.

This is an atom: 
September 29th.--Mr. Monekton Milnes called on me at the Consulate day
before yesterday.  He is pleasant and sensible.  Speaking of American
politicians, I remarked that they were seldom anything but politicians,
and had no literary or other culture beyond their own calling.  He said
the case was the same in England, and instanced Sir ------, who once
called on him for information when an appeal had been made to him
respecting two literary gentlemen.  Sir ------ had never heard the names
of either of these gentlemen, and applied to Mr. Milnes as being somewhat
conversant with the literary class, to know whether they were
distinguished and what were their claims.  The names of the two literary
men were James Sheridan Knowles and Alfred Tennyson.

This is an atom: 
October 5th.--Yesterday I was present at a dejeuner on board the James
Barnes, on occasion of her coming under the British flag, having been
built for the Messrs. Barnes by Donald McKay of Boston.  She is a
splendid vessel, and magnificently fitted up, though not with consummate
taste.  It would be worth while that ornamental architects and
upholsterers should study this branch of art, since the ship-builders
seem willing to expend a good deal of money on it.  In fact, I do not see
that there is anywhere else so much encouragement to the exercise of
ornamental art.  I saw nothing to criticise in the solid and useful
details of the ship; the ventilation, in particular, being free and
abundant, so that the hundreds of passengers who will have their berths
between decks, and at a still lower depth, will have good air and enough
of it.

This is an atom: 
There were four or five hundred persons, principally Liverpool merchants
and their wives, invited to the dejeuner; and the tables were spread
between decks, the berths for passengers not being yet put in.  There was
not quite light enough to make the scene cheerful, it being an overcast
day; and, indeed, there was an English plainness in the arrangement of
the festal room, which might have been better exchanged for the flowery
American taste, which I have just been criticising.  With flowers, and
the arrangement of flags, we should have made something very pretty of
the space between decks; but there was nothing to hide the fact that in a
few days hence there would be crowded berths and sea-sick steerage
passengers where we were now feasting.  The cheer was very good,--cold
fowl and meats; cold pies of foreign manufacture very rich, and of
mysterious composition; and champagne in plenty, with other wines for
those who liked them.

This is an atom: 
I sat between two ladies, one of them Mrs. ------, a pleasant young
woman, who, I believe, is of American provincial nativity, and whom I
therefore regarded as half a countrywoman.  We talked a good deal
together, and I confided to her my annoyance at the prospect of being
called up to answer a toast; but she did not pity me at all, though she
felt, much alarm about her husband, Captain ------, who was in the same
predicament.  Seriously, it is the most awful part of my official duty,--
this necessity of making dinner-speeches at the Mayor's, and other public
or semi-public tables.  However, my neighborhood to Mrs. ------ was good
for me, inasmuch as by laughing over the matter with her came to regard
it in a light and ludicrous way; and so, when the time actually came, I
stood up with a careless dare-devil feeling.  The chairman toasted the
president immediately after the Queen, and did me the honor to speak of
myself in a most flattering manner, something like this: "Great by his
position under the Republic,--greater still, I am bold to say, in the
Republic of letters!"  I made no reply at all to this; in truth, I forgot
all about it when I began to speak, and merely thanked the company in
behalf of the President, and my countrymen, and made a few remarks with
no very decided point to them.  However, they cheered and applauded, and
I took advantage of the applause to sit down, and Mrs. ------ informed me
that I had succeeded admirably.  It was no success at all, to be sure;
neither was it a failure, for I had aimed at nothing, and I had exactly
hit it.  But after sitting down, I was conscious of an enjoyment in
speaking to a public assembly, and felt as if I should like to rise
again.  It is something like being under fire,--a sort of excitement, not
exactly pleasure, but more piquant than most pleasures.  I have felt this
before, in the same circumstances; but, while on my legs, my impulse is
to get through with my remarks and sit down again as quickly as possible.
The next speech, I think, was by Rev. Dr. ------, the celebrated Arctic
gentleman, in reply to a toast complimentary to the clergy.  He turned
aside from the matter in hand, to express his kind feelings towards
America, where he said he had been most hospitably received, especially
at Cambridge University.  He also made allusions to me, and I suppose it
would have been no more than civil in me to have answered with a speech
in acknowledgment, but I did not choose to make another venture, so
merely thanked him across the corner of the table, for he sat near me.
He is a venerable-looking, white-haired gentleman, tall and slender, with
a pale, intelligent, kindly face.

This is an atom: 
Other speeches were made; but from beginning to end there was not one
breath of eloquence, nor even one neat sentence; and I rather think that
Englishmen would purposely avoid eloquence or neatness in after-dinner
speeches.  It seems to be no part of their object.  Yet any Englishman
almost, much more generally than Americans, will stand up and talk on in
a plain way, uttering one rough, ragged, and shapeless sentence after
another, and will have expressed himself sensibly, though in a very rude
manner, before he sits down.  And this is quite satisfactory to his
audience, who, indeed, are rather prejudiced against the man who speaks
too glibly.

This is an atom: 
The guests began to depart shortly after three o'clock.  This morning I
have seen two reports of my little speech,--one exceedingly incorrect;
another pretty exact, but not much to my taste, for I seem to have left
out everything that would have been fittest to say.

This is an atom: 
October 6th.--The people, for several days, have been in the utmost
anxiety, and latterly in the highest exultation about Sebastopol,--and
all England, and Europe to boot, have been fooled by the belief that it
had fallen.  This, however, now turns out to be incorrect; and the public
visage is somewhat grim, in consequence.  I am glad of it.  In spite of
his actual sympathies, it is impossible for a true American to be
otherwise than glad.  Success makes an Englishman intolerable; and,
already, on the mistaken idea that the way was open to a prosperous
conclusion of the war, The Times had begun to throw out menaces against
America.  I shall never love England till she sues to us for help, and,
in the mean time, the fewer triumphs she obtains, the better for all
parties.  An Englishman in adversity is a very respectable character; he
does not lose his dignity, but merely comes to a proper conception of
himself.  It is rather touching to an observer to see how much the
universal heart is in this matter,--to see the merchants gathering round
the telegraphic messages, posted on the pillars of the Exchange
news-room, the people in the street who cannot afford to buy a paper
clustering round the windows of the news-offices, where a copy is pinned
up,--the groups of corporals and sergeants at the recruiting rendezvous,
with a newspaper in the midst of them and all earnest and sombre, and
feeling like one man together, whatever their rank.  I seem to myself
like a spy or a traitor when I meet their eyes, and am conscious that I
neither hope nor fear in sympathy with them, although they look at me in
full confidence of sympathy.  Their heart "knoweth its own bitterness,"
and as for me, being a stranger and all alien, I "intermeddle not with
their joy."

This is an atom: 
October 9th.--My ancestor left England in 1630.  I return in 1853.  I
sometimes feel as if I myself had been absent these two hundred and
twenty-three years, leaving England just emerging from the feudal system,
and finding it, on my return, on the verge of republicanism.  It brings
the two far-separated points of time very closely together, to view the
matter thus.

This is an atom: 
October 16th.--A day or two ago arrived the sad news of the loss of the
Arctic by collision with a French steamer off Newfoundland, and the loss
also of three or four hundred people.  I have seldom been more affected
by anything quite alien from my personal and friendly concerns, than by
the death of Captain Luce and his son.  The boy was a delicate lad, and
it is said that he had never been absent from his mother till this time,
when his father had taken him to England to consult a physician about a
complaint in his hip.  So his father, while the ship was sinking, was
obliged to decide whether he would put the poor, weakly, timorous child
on board the boat, to take his hard chance of life there, or keep him to
go down with himself and the ship.  He chose the latter; and within half
an hour, I suppose, the boy was among the child-angels.  Captain Luce
could not do less than die, for his own part, with the responsibility of
all those lost lives upon him.  He may not have been in the least to
blame for the calamity, but it was certainly too heavy a one for him to
survive.  He was a sensible man, and a gentleman, courteous, quiet, with
something almost melancholy in his address and aspect.  Oftentimes he has
come into my inner office to say good-by before his departures, but I
cannot precisely remember whether or no he took leave of me before this
latest voyage.  I never exchanged a great many words with him; but those
were kind ones.

This is an atom: 
October 19th.--It appears to be customary for people of decent station,
but in distressed circumstances, to go round among their neighbors and
the public, accompanied by a friend, who explains the case.  I have been
accosted in the street in regard to one of these matters; and to-day
there came to my office a grocer, who had become security for a friend,
and who was threatened with an execution,--with another grocer for
supporter and advocate.  The beneficiary takes very little active part in
the affair, merely looking careworn, distressed, and pitiable, and
throwing in a word of corroboration, or a sigh, or an acknowledgment, as
the case may demand.  In the present instance, the friend, a young,
respectable-looking tradesman, with a Lancashire accent, spoke freely and
simply of his client's misfortunes, not pressing the case unduly, but
doing it full justice, and saying, at the close of the interview, that it
was no pleasant business for himself.  The broken grocer was an elderly
man, of somewhat sickly aspect.  The whole matter is very foreign to
American habits.  No respectable American would think of retrieving his
affairs by such means, but would prefer ruin ten times over; no friend
would take up his cause; no public would think it worth while to prevent
the small catastrophe.  And yet the custom is not without its good side
as indicating a closer feeling of brotherhood, a more efficient sense of
neighborhood, than exists among ourselves, although, perhaps, we are more
careless of a fellow-creature's ruin, because ruin with us is by no means
the fatal and irretrievable event that it is in England.

This is an atom: 
I am impressed with the ponderous and imposing look of an English legal
document,--an assignment of real estate in England, for instance,--
engrossed on an immense sheet of thickest paper, in a formal hand,
beginning with "This Indenture" in German text, and with occasional
phrases of form, breaking out into large script,--very long and
repetitious, fortified with the Mayor of Manchester's seal, two or three
inches in diameter, which is certified by a notary-public, whose
signature, again, is to have my consular certificate and official seal.

This is an atom: 
November 2d.--A young Frenchman enters, of gentlemanly aspect, with a
grayish cloak or paletot overspreading his upper person, and a handsome
and well-made pair of black trousers and well-fitting boots below.  On
sitting down, he does not throw off nor at all disturb the cloak.  Eying
him more closely, one discerns that he has no shirt-collar, and that what
little is visible of his shirt-bosom seems not to be of to-day nor of
yesterday,--perhaps not even of the day before.  His manner is not very
good; nevertheless, he is a coxcomb and a jackanapes.  He avers himself a
naturalized citizen of America, where he has been tutor in several
families of distinction, and has been treated like a son.  He left
America on account of his health, and came near being tutor in the Duke
of Norfolk's family, but failed for lack of testimonials; he is
exceedingly capable and accomplished, but reduced in funds, and wants
employment here, of the means of returning to America, where he intends
to take a situation under government, which he is sure of obtaining.  He
mentioned a quarrel which he had recently had with an Englishman in
behalf of America, and would have fought a duel had such been the custom
of the country.  He made the Englishman foam at the mouth, and told him
that he had been twelve years at a military school, and could easily kill
him.  I say to him that I see little or no prospect of his getting
employment here, but offer to inquire whether any situation, as clerk or
otherwise, can be obtained for him in a vessel returning to America, and
ask his address.  He has no address.  Much to my surprise, he takes his
leave without requesting pecuniary aid, but hints that he shall call
again.  He is a very disagreeable young fellow, like scores of others who
call on me in the like situation.  His English is very good for a
Frenchman, and he says he speaks it the least well of five languages.  He
has been three years in America, and obtained his naturalization papers,
he says, as a special favor, and by means of strong interest.  Nothing is
so absolutely odious as the sense of freedom and equality pertaining to
an American grafted on the mind of a native of any other country in the
world.  A naturalized citizen is HATEFUL.  Nobody has a right to our
ideas, unless born to them.

This is an atom: 
November 9th.--I lent the above Frenchman a small sum; he advertised for
employment as a teacher; and he called this morning to thank me for my
aid, and says Mr. C------ has engaged him for his children, at a guinea a
week, and that he has also another engagement.  The poor fellow seems to
have been brought to a very low ebb.  He has pawned everything, even to
his last shirt, save the one he had on, and had been living at the rate
of twopence a day.  I had procured him a chance to return to America, but
he was ashamed to go back in such poor circumstances, and so determined
to seek better fortune here.  I like him better than I did,--partly, I
suppose, because I have helped him.

This is an atom: 
November 14th.--The other day I saw an elderly gentleman walking in Dale
Street, apparently in a state of mania; for as he limped along (being
afflicted with lameness) he kept talking to himself, and sometimes
breaking out into a threat against some casual passenger.  He was a very
respectable-looking man; and I remember to have seen him last summer, in
the steamer, returning from the Isle of Man, where he had been staying at
Castle Mona.  What a strange and ugly predicament it would be for a
person of quiet habits to be suddenly smitten with lunacy at noonday in a
crowded street, and to walk along through a dim maze of extravagances,--
partly conscious of then, but unable to resist the impulse to give way to
them!  A long-suppressed nature might be represented as bursting out in
this way, for want of any other safety-valve.

This is an atom: 
In America, people seem to consider the government merely as a political
administration; and they care nothing for the credit of it, unless it be
the administration of their own political party.  In England, all people,
of whatever party, are anxious for the credit of their rulers.  Our
government, as a knot of persons, changes so entirely every four years,
that the institution has come to be considered a temporary thing.

This is an atom: 
Looking at the moon the other evening, little R----- said, "It blooms out
in the morning!" taking the moon to be the bud of the sun.

This is an atom: 
The English are a most intolerant people.  Nobody is permitted, nowadays,
to have any opinion but the prevalent one.  There seems to be very little
difference between their educated and ignorant classes in this respect;
if any, it is to the credit of the latter, who do not show tokens of such
extreme interest in the war.  It is agreeable, however, to observe how
all Englishmen pull together,--how each man comes forward with his little
scheme for helping on the war,--how they feel themselves members of one
family, talking together about their common interest, as if they were
gathered around one fireside; and then what a hearty meed of honor they
award to their soldiers!  It is worth facing death for.  Whereas, in
America, when our soldiers fought as good battles, with as great
proportionate loss, and far more valuable triumphs, the country seemed
rather ashamed than proud of them.

This is an atom: 
Mrs. Heywood tells me that there are many Catholics among the lower
classes in Lancashire and Cheshire,--probably the descendants of
retainers of the old Catholic nobility and gentry, who are more numerous
in these shires than in other parts of England.  The present Lord
Sefton's grandfather was the first of that race who became Protestant.

This is an atom: 
December 25th.--Commodore P------ called to see me this morning,--a
brisk, gentlemanly, offhand, but not rough, unaffected and sensible man,
looking not so elderly as he ought, on account of a very well made wig.
He is now on his return from a cruise in the East Indian seas, and goes
home by the Baltic, with a prospect of being very well received on
account of his treaty with Japan.  I seldom meet with a man who puts
himself more immediately on conversable terms than the Commodore.  He
soon introduced his particular business with me,--it being to inquire
whether I would recommend some suitable person to prepare his notes and
materials for the publication of an account of his voyage.  He was good
enough to say that he had fixed upon me, in his own mind, for this
office; but that my public duties would of course prevent me from
engaging in it.  I spoke of Herman Melville, and one or two others; but
he seems to have some acquaintance with the literature of the day, and
did not grasp very cordially at any name that I could think of; nor,
indeed, could I recommend any one with full confidence.  It would be a
very desirable task for a young literary man, or, for that matter, for an
old one; for the world can scarcely have in reserve a less hackneyed
theme than Japan.

This is an atom: 
This is a most beautiful day of English winter; clear and bright, with
the ground a little frozen, and the green grass along the waysides at
Rock Ferry sprouting up through the frozen pools of yesterday's rain.
England is forever green.  On Christmas day, the children found
wall-flowers, pansies, and pinks in the garden; and we had a beautiful
rose from the garden of the hotel grown in the open air.  Yet one is
sensible of the cold here, as much as in the zero atmosphere of America.
The chief advantage of the English climate is that we are not tempted to
heat our rooms to so unhealthy a degree as in New England.

This is an atom: 
I think I have been happier this Christmas than ever before,--by my own
fireside, and with my wife and children about me,--more content to enjoy
what I have,--less anxious for anything beyond it in this life.

This is an atom: 
My early life was perhaps a good preparation for the declining half of
life; it having been such a blank that any thereafter would compare
favorably with it.  For a long, long while, I have occasionally been
visited with a singular dream; and I have an impression that I have
dreamed it ever since I have been in England.  It is, that I am still at
college,--or, sometimes, even at school,--and there is a sense that I
have been there unconscionably long, and have quite failed to make such
progress as my contemporaries have done; and I seem to meet some of them
with a feeling of shame and depression that broods over me as I think of
it, even when awake.  This dream, recurring all through these twenty or
thirty years, must be one of the effects of that heavy seclusion in which
I shut myself up for twelve years after leaving college, when everybody
moved onward, and left me behind.  How strange that it should come now,
when I may call myself famous and prosperous!--when I am happy, too!

This is an atom: 
January 3d, 1855.--The progress of the age is trampling over the
aristocratic institutions of England, and they crumble beneath it.  This
war has given the country a vast impulse towards democracy.  The nobility
will never hereafter, I think, assume or be permitted to rule the nation
in peace, or command armies in war, on any ground except the individual
ability which may appertain to one of their number, as well as to a
commoner.  And yet the nobles were never positively more noble than now;
never, perhaps, so chivalrous, so honorable, so highly cultivated; but,
relatively to the rest of the world, they do not maintain their old
place.  The pressure of the war has tested and proved this fact, at home
and abroad.  At this moment it would be an absurdity in the nobles to
pretend to the position which was quietly conceded to them a year ago.
This one year has done the work of fifty ordinary ones; or, more
accurately, it has made apparent what has long been preparing itself.

This is an atom: 
January 6th.--The American ambassador called on me to-day and stayed a
good while,--an hour or two.  He is visiting at Mr. William Browne's, at
Richmond Hill, having come to this region to bring his niece, who is to
be bride's-maid at the wedding of an American girl.  I like Mr. ------.
He cannot exactly be called gentlemanly in his manners, there being a
sort of rusticity about him; moreover, he has a habit of squinting one
eye, and an awkward carriage of his head; hut, withal, a dignity in his
large person, and a consciousness of high position and importance, which
gives him ease and freedom.  Very simple and frank in his address, he may
be as crafty as other diplomatists are said to be; but I see only good
sense and plainness of speech,--appreciative, too, and genial enough to
make himself conversable.  He talked very freely of himself and of other
public people, and of American and English affairs.  He returns to
America, he says, next October, and then retires forever from public
life, being sixty-four years of age, and having now no desire except to
write memoirs of his times, and especially of the administration of Mr.
Polk.  I suggested a doubt whether the people would permit him to retire;
and he immediately responded to my hint as regards his prospects for the
Presidency.  He said that his mind was fully made up, and that he would
never be a candidate, and that he had expressed this decision to his
friends in such a way as to put it out of his own power to change it.  He
acknowledged that he should have been glad of the nomination for the
Presidency in 1852, but that it was now too late, and that he was too
old,--and, in short, he seemed to be quite sincere in his nolo
episcopari; although, really, he is the only Democrat, at this moment,
whom it would not be absurd to talk of for the office.  As he talked, his
face flushed, and he seemed to feel inwardly excited.  Doubtless, it was
the high vision of half his lifetime which he here relinquished.  I
cannot question that he is sincere; but, of course, should the people
insist upon having him for President, he is too good a patriot to refuse.
I wonder whether he can have had any object in saying all this to me.  He
might see that it would be perfectly natural for me to tell it to General
Pierce.  But it is a very vulgar idea,--this of seeing craft and
subtlety, when there is a plain and honest aspect.

This is an atom: 
January 9th.--I dined at Mr. William Browne's (M. P.) last, evening with
a large party.  The whole table and dessert service was of silver.
Speaking of Shakespeare, Mr. ------ said that the Duke of Somerset, who
is now nearly fourscore, told him that the father of John and Charles
Kemble had made all possible research into the events of Shakespeare's
life, and that he had found reason to believe that Shakespeare attended a
certain revel at Stratford, and, indulging too much in the conviviality
of the occasion, he tumbled into a ditch on his way home, and died there!
The Kemble patriarch was an aged man when he communicated this to the
Duke; and their ages, linked to each other; would extend back a good way;
scarcely to the beginning of the last century, however.  If I mistake
not, it was from the traditions of Stratford that Kemble had learned the
above.  I do not remember ever to have seen it in print,--which is most
singular.

This is an atom: 
Miss L---- has an English rather than an American aspect,--being of
stronger outline than most of our young ladies, although handsomer than
English women generally, extremely self-possessed and well poised without
affectation or assumption, but quietly conscious of rank, as much so as
if she were an Earl's daughter.  In truth, she felt pretty much as an
Earl's daughter would do towards the merchants' wives and daughters who
made up the feminine portion of the party.

This is an atom: 
I talked with her a little, and found her sensible, vivacious, and
firm-textured, rather than soft and sentimental.  She paid me some
compliments; but I do not remember paying her any.

This is an atom: 
Mr. J-----'s daughters, two pale, handsome girls, were present.  One of
them is to be married to a grandson of Mr. ------, who was also at the
dinner.  He is a small young man, with a thin and fair mustache, . . . .
and a lady who sat next me whispered that his expectations are 6,000
pounds per annum.  It struck me, that, being a country gentleman's son,
he kept himself silent and reserved, as feeling himself too good for this
commercial dinner-party; but perhaps, and I rather think so, he was
really shy and had nothing to say, being only twenty-one, and therefore
quite a boy among Englishmen.  The only man of cognizable rank present,
except Mr. ------ and the Mayor of Liverpool, was a Baronet, Sir Thomas
Birch.

This is an atom: 
January 17th.--S---- and I were invited to be present at the wedding of
Mr. J-------'s daughter this morning, but we were also bidden to the
funeral services of Mrs. G------, a young American lady; and we went to
the "house of mourning," rather than to the "house of feasting."  Her
death was very sudden.  I crossed to Rock Ferry on Saturday, and met her
husband in the boat.  He said his wife was rather unwell, and that he had
just been sent for to see her; but he did not seem at all alarmed.  And
yet, on reaching home, he found her dead!  The body is to be conveyed to
America, and the funeral service was read over her in her house, only a
few neighbors and friends being present.  We were shown into a darkened
room, where there was a dim gaslight burning, and a fire glimmering, and
here and there a streak of sunshine struggling through the drawn
curtains.  Mr. G------ looked pale, and quite overcome with grief,--this,
I suppose, being his first sorrow,--and he has a young baby on his hands,
and no doubt, feels altogether forlorn in this foreign land.  The
clergyman entered in his canonicals, and we walked in a little procession
into another room, where the coffin was placed.

This is an atom: 
Mr. G------ sat down and rested his head on the coffin: the clergyman
read the service; then knelt down, as did most of the company, and prayed
with great propriety of manner, but with no earnestness,--and we
separated.

This is an atom: 
Mr. G------ is a small, smooth, and pretty young man, not emphasized in
any way; but grief threw its awfulness about him to-day in a degree which
I should not have expected.

This is an atom: 
January 20th.--Mr. Steele, a gentleman of Rock Ferry, showed me this
morning a pencil-case formerly belonging to Dr. Johnson.  It is six or
seven inches long, of large calibre, and very clumsily manufactured of
iron, perhaps plated in its better days, but now quite bare.  Indeed, it
looks as rough as an article of kitchen furniture.  The intaglio on the
end is a lion rampant.  On the whole, it well became Dr. Johnson to have
used such a stalwart pencil-case.  It had a six-inch measure on a part of
it, so that it must have been at least eight inches long.  Mr. Steele
says he has seen a cracked earthen teapot, of large size, in which Miss
Williams used to make tea for Dr. Johnson.

This is an atom: 
God himself cannot compensate us for being born for any period short of
eternity.  All the misery endured here constitutes a claim for another
life, and, still more, all the happiness; because all true happiness
involves something more than the earth owns, and needs something more
than a mortal capacity for the enjoyment of it.

This is an atom: 
After receiving an injury on the head, a person fancied all the rest of
his life that he heard voices flouting, jeering, and upbraiding him.

This is an atom: 
February 19th.--I dined with the Mayor at the Town Hall last Friday
evening.  I sat next to Mr. W. J------, an Irish-American merchant, who
is in very good standing here.  He told me that he used to be very well
acquainted with General Jackson, and that he was present at the street
fight between him and the Bentons, and helped to take General Jackson off
the ground.  Colonel Benton shot at him from behind; but it was Jesse
Benton's ball that hit him and broke his arm.  I did not understand him
to infer any treachery or cowardice from the circumstance of Colonel
Benton's shooting at Jackson from behind, but, suppose it occurred in the
confusion and excitement of a street fight.  Mr. W. J------ seems to
think that, after all, the reconciliation between the old General and
Benton was merely external, and that they really hated one another as
before.  I do not think so.

This is an atom: 
These dinners of the Mayors are rather agreeable than otherwise, except
for the annoyance, in my case, of being called up to speak to a toast,
and that is less disagreeable than at first.  The suite of rooms at the
Town House is stately and splendid, and all the Mayors, as far as I have
seen, exercise hospitality in a manner worthy of the chief magistrates of
a great city.  They are supposed always to spend much more than their
salary (which is 2,000 pounds) in these entertainments.  The town
provides the wines, I am told, and it might be expected that they should
be particularly good,--at least, those which improve by age, for a
quarter of a century should be only a moderate age for wine from the
cellars of centuries-long institutions, like a corporate borough.  Each
Mayor might lay in a supply of the best vintage he could find, and trust
his good name to posterity to the credit of that wine; and so he would be
kindly and warmly remembered long after his own nose had lost its
rubicundity.  In point of fact, the wines seem to be good, but not
remarkable.  The dinner was good, and very handsomely served, with
attendance enough, both in the hall below--where the door was wide open
at the appointed hour, notwithstanding the cold--and at table; some
being in the rich livery of the borough, and some in plain clothes.
Servants, too, were stationed at various points from the hall to the
reception-room; and the last one shouted forth the name of the entering
guest.  There were, I should think, about fifty guests at this dinner.
Two bishops were present.  The Bishops of Chester and New South Wales,
dressed in a kind of long tunics, with black breeches and silk stockings,
insomuch that I first fancied they were Catholics.  Also Dr. McNeil, in a
stiff-collared coat, looking more like a general than a divine.  There
were two officers in blue uniforms; and all the rest of us were in black,
with only two white waistcoats,--my own being one,--and a rare sprinkling
of white cravats.  How hideously a man looks in them!  I should like to
have seen such assemblages as must have gathered in that reception-room,
and walked with stately tread to the dining-hall, in times past, the
Mayor and other civic dignitaries in their robes, noblemen in their state
dresses, the Consul in his olive-leaf embroidery, everybody in some sort
of bedizenment,--and then the dinner would have been a magnificent
spectacle, worthy of the gilded hall, the rich table-service, and the
powdered and gold-laced servitors.  At a former dinner I remember seeing
a gentleman in small-clothes, with a dress-sword; but all formalities of
the kind are passing away.  The Mayor's dinners, too, will no doubt be
extinct before many years go by.  I drove home from the Woodside Ferry in
a cab with Bishop Burke and two other gentlemen.  The Bishop is nearly
seven feet high.

This is an atom: 
After writing the foregoing account of a civic banquet, where I ate
turtle-soup, salmon, woodcock, oyster patties, and I know not what else,
I have been to the News-room and found the Exchange pavement densely
thronged with people of all ages and of all manner of dirt and rags.
They were waiting for soup-tickets, and waiting very patiently too,
without outcry or disturbance, or even sour looks,--only patience and
meekness in their faces.  Well, I don't know that they have a right to be
impatient of starvation; but, still there does seem to be an insolence of
riches and prosperity, which one day or another will have a downfall.
And this will be a pity, too.

This is an atom: 
On Saturday I went with my friend Mr. Bright to Otterpool and to Larkhill
to see the skaters on the private waters of those two seats of gentlemen;
and it is a wonder to behold--and it is always a new wonder to me--how
comfortable Englishmen know how to make themselves; locating their
dwellings far within private grounds, with secure gateways and porters'
lodges, and the smoothest roads and trimmest paths, and shaven lawns, and
clumps of trees, and every bit of the ground, every hill and dell, made
the most of for convenience and beauty, and so well kept that even winter
cannot cause disarray; and all this appropriated to the same family for
generations, so that I suppose they come to believe it created
exclusively and on purpose for them.  And, really, the result is good and
beautiful.  It is a home,--an institution which we Americans have not;
but then I doubt whether anybody is entitled to a home in this world, in
so full a sense.

This is an atom: 
The day was very cold, and the skaters seemed to enjoy themselves
exceedingly.  They were, I suppose, friends of the owners of the grounds,
and Mr. Bright said they were treated in a jolly way, with hot luncheons.
The skaters practise skating more as an art, and can perform finer
manoeuvres on the ice, than our New England skaters usually can, though
the English have so much less opportunity for practice.  A beggar-woman
was haunting the grounds at Otterpool, but I saw nobody give her
anything.  I wonder how she got inside of the gate.

This is an atom: 
Mr. W. J------ spoke of General Jackson as having come from the same part
of Ireland as himself, and perhaps of the same family.  I wonder whether
he meant to say that the General was born in Ireland,--that having been
suspected in America.

This is an atom: 
February 21st.--Yesterday two companies of work-people came to our house
in Rock Park, asking assistance, being out of work and with no resource
other than charity.  There were a dozen or more in each party.  Their
deportment was quiet and altogether unexceptionable,--no rudeness, no
gruffness, nothing of menace.  Indeed, such demonstrations would not have
been safe, as they were followed about by two policemen; but they really
seem to take their distress as their own misfortune and God's will, and
impute it to nobody as a fault.  This meekness is very touching, and
makes one question the more whether they have all their rights.  There
have been disturbances, within a day or two, in Liverpool, and shops have
been broken open and robbed of bread and money; but this is said to have
been done by idle vagabonds, and not by the really hungry work-people.
These last submit to starvation gently and patiently, as if it were an
every-day matter with them, or, at least, nothing but what lay fairly
within their horoscope.  I suppose, in fact, their stomachs have the
physical habit that makes hunger not intolerable, because customary.  If
they had been used to a full meat diet, their hunger would be fierce,
like that of ravenous beasts; but now they are trained to it.

This is an atom: 
I think that the feeling of an American, divided, as I am, by the ocean
from his country, has a continual and immediate correspondence with the
national feeling at home; and it seems to be independent of any external
communication.  Thus, my ideas about the Russian war vary in accordance
with the state of the public mind at home, so that I am conscious
whereabouts public sympathy is.

This is an atom: 
March 7th.--J----- and I walked to Tranmere, and passed an old house
which I suppose to be Tranmere Hall.  Our way to it was up a hollow lane,
with a bank and hedge on each side, and with a few thatched stone
cottages, centuries old, their ridge-poles crooked and the stones
time-worn, scattered along.  At one point there was a wide, deep well,
hewn out of the solid red freestone, and with steps, also hewn in solid
rock, leading down to it.  These steps were much hollowed by the feet of
those who had come to the well; and they reach beneath the water, which
is very high.  The well probably supplied water to the old cotters and
retainers of Tranmere Hall five hundred years ago.  The Hall stands on
the verge of a long hill which stretches behind Tranmere and as far as
Birkenhead.

This is an atom: 
It is an old gray stone edifice, with a good many gables, and windows
with mullions, and some of them extending the whole breadth of the gable.
In some parts of the house, the windows seem to have been built up;
probably in the days when daylight was taxed.  The form of the Hall is
multiplex, the roofs sloping down and intersecting one another, so as to
make the general result indescribable.  There were two sun-dials on
different sides of the house, both the dial-plates of which were of
stone; and on one the figures, so far as I could see, were quite worn
off, but the gnomon still cast a shadow over it in such a way that I
could judge that it was about noon.  The other dial had some half-worn
hour-marks, but no gnomon.  The chinks of the stones of the house were
very weedy, and the building looked quaint and venerable; but it is now
converted into a farm-house, with the farm-yard and outbuildings closely
appended.  A village, too, has grown up about it, so that it seems out of
place among modern stuccoed dwellings, such as are erected for tradesmen
and other moderate people who have their residences in the neighborhood
of a great city.  Among these there are a few thatched cottages, the
homeliest domiciles that ever mortals lived in, belonging to the old
estate.  Directly across the street is a Wayside Inn, "licensed to sell
wine, spirits, ale, and tobacco."  The street itself has been laid out
since the land grew valuable by the increase of Liverpool and Birkenhead;
for the old Hall would never have been built on the verge of a public
way.

This is an atom: 
March 27th.--I attended court to day, at St. George's Hall, with my wife,
Mr. Bright, and Mr. Channing, sitting in the High Sheriff's seat.  It was
the civil side, and Mr. Justice Cresswell presided.  The lawyers, as far
as aspect goes, seemed to me inferior to an American bar, judging from
their countenances, whether as intellectual men or gentlemen.  Their wigs
and gowns do not impose on the spectator, though they strike him as an
imposition.  Their date is past.  Mr. Warren, of the "Ten Thousand a
Year," was in court,--a pale, thin, intelligent face, evidently a nervous
man, more unquiet than anybody else in court,--always restless in his
seat, whispering to his neighbors, settling his wig, perhaps with an idea
that people single him out.

This is an atom: 
St. George's Hall--the interior hall itself, I mean--is a spacious,
lofty, and most rich and noble apartment, and very satisfactory.  The
pavement is made of mosaic tiles, and has a beautiful effect.

This is an atom: 
April 7th.--I dined at Mr. J. P. Heywood's on Thursday, and met there Mr.
and Mrs. ------ of Smithell's Hall.  The Hall is an old edifice of some
five hundred years, and Mrs. ------ says there is a bloody footstep at
the foot of the great staircase.  The tradition is that a certain martyr,
in Bloody Mary's time, being examined before the occupant of the Hall,
and committed to prison, stamped his foot, in earnest protest against the
injustice with which he was treated.  Blood issued from his foot, which
slid along the stone pavement, leaving a long footmark, printed in blood.
And there it has remained ever since, in spite of the scrubbings of all
succeeding generations.  Mrs. ------ spoke of it with much solemnity,
real or affected.  She says that they now cover the bloody impress with a
carpet, being unable to remove it.  In the History of Lancashire, which I
looked at last night, there is quite a different account,--according to
which the footstep is not a bloody one, but is a slight cavity or
inequality in the surface of the stone, somewhat in the shape of a man's
foot with a peaked shoe.  The martyr's name was George Marsh.  He was a
curate, and was afterwards burnt.  Mrs. ------ asked me to go and see the
Hall and the footmark; and as it is in Lancashire, and not a great way
off, and a curious old place, perhaps I may.

This is an atom: 
April 12th.--The Earl of ------, whom I saw the other day at St. George's
Hall, has a somewhat elderly look,--a pale and rather thin face, which
strikes one as remarkably short, or compressed from top to bottom.
Nevertheless, it has great intelligence, and sensitiveness too, I should
think, but a cold, disagreeable expression.  I should take him to be a
man of not very pleasant temper,--not genial.  He has no physical
presence nor dignity, yet one sees him to be a person of rank and
consequence.  But, after all, there is nothing about him which it need
have taken centuries of illustrious nobility to produce, especially in a
man of remarkable ability, as Lord ------ certainly is.  S-----, who
attended court all through the Hapgood trial, and saw Lord ------ for
hours together every day, has come to conclusions quite different from
mine.  She thinks him a perfectly natural person, without any assumption,
any self-consciousness, any scorn of the lower world.  She was delighted
with his ready appreciation and feeling of what was passing around him,--
his quick enjoyment of a joke,--the simplicity and unaffectedness of his
emotion at whatever incidents excited his interest,--the genial
acknowledgment of sympathy, causing him to look round and exchange
glances with those near him, who were not his individual friends, but
barristers and other casual persons.  He seemed to her all that a
nobleman ought to be, entirely simple and free from pretence and
self-assertion, which persons of lower rank can hardly help bedevilling
themselves with.  I saw him only for a very few moments, so cannot put my
observation against hers, especially as I was influenced by what I had
heard the Liverpool people say of him.

This is an atom: 
I do not know whether I have mentioned that the handsomest man I have
seen in England was a young footman of Mr. Heywood's.  In his rich
livery, he was a perfect Joseph Andrews.

This is an atom: 
In my Romance, the original emigrant to America may have carried away
with him a family secret, whereby it was in his power, had he so chosen,
to have brought about the ruin of the family.  This secret he transmits
to his American progeny, by whom it is inherited throughout all the
intervening generations.  At last, the hero of the Romance comes to
England, and finds, that, by means of this secret, he still has it in his
power to procure the downfall of the family.  It would be something
similar to the story of Meleager, whose fate depended on the firebrand
that his mother had snatched from the flames.

This is an atom: 
April 24th.--On Saturday I was present at a dejeuner on board the Donald
McKay; the principal guest being Mr. Layard, M. P.  There were several
hundred people, quite filling the between decks of the ship, which was
converted into a saloon for the occasion.  I sat next to Mr. Layard, at
the head of the table, and so had a good opportunity of seeing and
getting acquainted with him.  He is a man in early middle age,--of middle
stature, with an open, frank, intelligent, kindly face.  His forehead is
not expansive, but is prominent in the perceptive regions, and retreats a
good deal.  His mouth is full,--I liked him from the first.  He was very
kind and complimentary to me, and made me promise to go and see him in
London.

This is an atom: 
It would have been a very pleasant entertainment, only that my pleasure
in it was much marred by having to acknowledge a toast, in honor of the
President.  However, such things do not trouble me nearly so much as they
used to do, and I came through it tolerably enough.  Mr. Layard's speech
was the great affair of the day.  He speaks with much fluency (though he
assured me that he had to put great force upon himself to speak
publicly), and, as he warms up, seems to engage with his whole moral and
physical man,--quite possessed with what he has to say.  His evident
earnestness and good faith make him eloquent, and stand him instead of
oratorical graces.  His views of the position of England and the
prospects of the war were as dark as well could be; and his speech was
exceedingly to the purpose, full of common-sense, and with not one word
of clap-trap.  Judging from its effect upon the audience, he spoke the
voice of the whole English people,--although an English Baronet, who sat
next below me, seemed to dissent, or at least to think that it was not
exactly the thing for a stranger to hear.  It concluded amidst great
cheering.  Mr. Layard appears to be a true Englishman, with a moral force
and strength of character, and earnestness of purpose, and fulness of
common-sense, such as have always served England's turn in her past
successes; but rather fit for resistance than progress.  No doubt, he is
a good and very able man; but I question whether he could get England out
of the difficulties which he sees so clearly, or could do much better
than Lord Palmerston, whom he so decries.

This is an atom: 
April 25th.--Taking the deposition of sailors yesterday, in a case of
alleged ill-usage by the officers of a vessel, one of the witnesses was
an old seaman of sixty.  In reply to some testimony of his, the captain
said, "You were the oldest man in the ship, and we honored you as such."
The mate also said that he never could have thought of striking an old
man like that.  Indeed, the poor old fellow had a kind of dignity and
venerableness about him, though he confessed to having been drunk, and
seems to have been a mischief-maker, what they call a sea-preacher,--
promoting discontent and grumbling.  He must have been a very handsome
man in his youth, having regular features of a noble and beautiful cast.
His beard was gray; but his dark hair had hardly a streak of white, and
was abundant all over his head.  He was deaf, and seemed to sit in a kind
of seclusion, unless when loudly questioned or appealed to.  Once he
broke forth from a deep silence thus, "I defy any man!" and then was
silent again.  It had a strange effect, this general defiance, which he
meant, I suppose, in answer to some accusation that he thought was made
against him.  His general behavior throughout the examination was very
decorous and proper; and he said he had never but once hitherto been
before a consul, and that was in 1819, when a mate had ill-used him, and,
"being a young man then, I gave him a beating,"--whereupon his face
gleamed with a quiet smile, like faint sunshine on an old ruin.  "By many
a tempest has his beard been shook"; and I suppose he must soon go into a
workhouse, and thence, shortly, to his grave.  He is now in a hospital,
having, as the surgeon certifies, some ribs fractured; but there does not
appear to have been any violence used upon him aboard the ship of such a
nature as to cause this injury, though he swears it was a blow from a
rope, and nothing else.  What struck me in the case was the respect and
rank that his age seemed to give him, in the view of the officers; and
how, as the captain's expression signified, it lifted him out of his low
position, and made him a person to be honored.  The dignity of his manner
is perhaps partly owing to the ancient mariner, with his long experience,
being an oracle among the forecastle men.

This is an atom: 
May 3d.--It rains to-day, after a very long period of east-wind and dry
weather.  The east-wind here, blowing across the island, seems to be the
least damp of all the winds; but it is full of malice and mischief, of an
indescribably evil temper, and stabs one like a cold, poisoned dagger.  I
never spent so disagreeable a spring as this, although almost every day
for a month has been bright.

This is an atom: 
Friday, May 11th.--A few weeks ago, a sailor, a most pitiable object,
came to my office to complain of cruelty from his captain and mate.  They
had beaten him shamefully, of which he bore grievous marks about his face
and eyes, and bruises on his head and other parts of his person: and
finally the ship had sailed, leaving him behind.  I never in my life saw
so forlorn a fellow, so ragged, so wretched; and even his wits seemed to
have been beaten out of him, if perchance he ever had any.  He got an
order for the hospital; and there he has been, off and on, ever since,
till yesterday, when I received a message that he was dying, and wished
to see the Consul; so I went with Mr. Wilding to the hospital.  We were
ushered into the waiting-room,--a kind of parlor, with a fire in the
grate, and a centre-table, whereon lay one or two medical journals, with
wood engravings; and there was a young man, who seemed to be an official
of the house, reading.  Shortly the surgeon appeared,--a brisk, cheerful,
kindly sort of person, whom I have met there on previous visits.  He told
us that the man was dying, and probably would not be able to communicate
anything, but, nevertheless, ushered us up to the highest floor, and into
the room where he lay.  It was a large, oblong room, with ten or twelve
beds in it, each occupied by a patient.  The surgeon said that the
hospital was often so crowded that they were compelled to lay some of the
patients on the floor.  The man whom we came to see lay on his bed in a
little recess formed by a projecting window; so that there was a kind of
seclusion for him to die in.  He seemed quite insensible to outward
things, and took no notice of our approach, nor responded to what was
said to him,--lying on his side, breathing with short gasps,--his
apparent disease being inflammation of the chest, although the surgeon
said that he might be found to have sustained internal injury by bruises.
he was restless, tossing his head continually, mostly with his eyes shut,
and much compressed and screwed up, but sometimes opening them; and then
they looked brighter and darker than when I first saw them.  I think his
face was not at any time so stupid as at his first interview with me; but
whatever intelligence he had was rather inward than outward, as if there
might be life and consciousness at a depth within, while as to external
matters he was in a mist.  The surgeon felt his wrist, and said that
there was absolutely no pulsation, and that he might die at any moment,
or might perhaps live an hour, but that there was no prospect of his
being able to communicate with me.  He was quite restless, nevertheless,
and sometimes half raised himself in bed, sometimes turned himself quite
over, and then lay gasping for an instant.  His woollen shirt being
thrust up on his arm, there appeared a tattooing of a ship and
anchor, and other nautical emblems, on both of them, which another
sailor-patient, on examining them, said must have been done years ago.
This might be of some importance, because the dying man had told me, when
I first saw him, that he was no sailor, but a farmer, and that, this
being his first voyage, he had been beaten by the captain for not doing a
sailor's duty, which he had had no opportunity of learning.  These
sea-emblems indicated that he was probably a seaman of some years'
service.

This is an atom: 
While we stood in the little recess, such of the other patients as were
convalescent gathered near the foot of the bed; and the nurse came and
looked on, and hovered about us,--a sharp-eyed, intelligent woman of
middle age, with a careful and kind expression, neglecting nothing that
was for the patient's good, yet taking his death as coolly as any other
incident in her daily business.  Certainly, it was a very forlorn
death-bed; and I felt--what I have heretofore been inclined to doubt--
that it might, be a comfort to have persons whom one loves, to go with us
to the threshold of the other world, and leave us only when we are fairly
across it.  This poor fellow had a wife and two children on the other
side of the water.

This is an atom: 
At first he did not utter any sound; but by and by he moaned a little,
and gave tokens of being more sensible to outward concerns,--not quite so
misty and dreamy as hitherto.  We had been talking all the while--myself
in a whisper, but the surgeon in his ordinary tones--about his state,
without his paying any attention.  But now the surgeon put his mouth down
to the man's face and said, "Do you know that you are dying?"  At this
the patient's head began to move upon the pillow; and I thought at first
that it was only the restlessness that he had shown all along; but soon
it appeared to be an expression of emphatic dissent, a negative shake of
the head.  He shook it with all his might, and groaned and mumbled, so
that it was very evident how miserably reluctant he was to die.  Soon
after this he absolutely spoke.  "O, I want you to get me well!  I want
to get away from here!" in a groaning and moaning utterance.  The
surgeon's question had revived him, but to no purpose; for, being told
that the Consul had come to see him, and asked whether he had anything to
communicate, he said only, "O, I want him to get me well!" and the whole
life that was left in him seemed to be unwillingness to die.  This did
not last long; for he soon relapsed into his first state, only with his
face a little more pinched and screwed up, and his eyes strangely sunken.
And lost in his head; and the surgeon said that there would be no use in
my remaining.  So I took my leave.  Mr. Wilding had brought a deposition
of the man's evidence, which he had clearly made at the Consulate, for
him to sign, and this we left with the surgeon, in case there should be
such an interval of consciousness and intelligence before death as to
make it possible for him to sign it.  But of this there is no
probability.

This is an atom: 
I have just received a note from the hospital, stating that the sailor,
Daniel Smith, died about three quarters of an hour after I saw him.

This is an atom: 
May 18th.--The above-mentioned Daniel Smith had about him a bundle of
letters, which I have examined.  They are all very yellow, stained with
sea-water, smelling of bad tobacco-smoke, and much worn at the folds.
Never were such ill-written letters, nor such incredibly fantastic
spelling.  They seem to be from various members of his family,--most of
them from a brother, who purports to have been a deck-hand in the
coasting and steamboat trade between Charleston and other ports; others
from female relations; one from his father, in which he inquires how long
his son has been in jail, and when the trial is to come on,--the offence,
however, of which he was accused, not being indicated.  But from the
tenor of his brother's letters, it would appear that he was a small
farmer in the interior of South Carolina, sending butter, eggs, and
poultry to be sold in Charleston by his brother, and receiving the
returns in articles purchased there.  This was his own account of
himself; and he affirmed, in his deposition before me, that he had never
had any purpose of shipping for Liverpool, or anywhere else; but that,
going on board the ship to bring a man's trunk ashore, he was compelled
to remain and serve as a sailor.  This was a hard fate, certainly, and a
strange thing to happen in the United States at this day,--that a free
citizen should be absolutely kidnapped, carried to a foreign country,
treated with savage cruelty during the voyage, and left to die on his
arrival.  Yet all this has unquestionably been done, and will probably go
unpunished.

This is an atom: 
The seed of the long-stapled cotton, now cultivated in America, was sent
there in 1786 from the Bahama Islands, by some of the royalist refugees,
who had settled there.  The inferior short-stapled cotton had been
previously cultivated for domestic purposes.  The seeds of every other
variety have been tried without success.  The kind now grown was first
introduced into Georgia.  Thus to the refugees America owes as much of
her prosperity as is due to the cotton-crops, and much of whatever harm
is to result from slavery.

This is an atom: 
May 22d.--Captain J------ says that he saw, in his late voyage to
Australia and India, a vessel commanded by an Englishman, who had with
him his wife and thirteen children.  This ship was the home of the
family, and they had no other.  The thirteen children had all been born
on board, and had been brought up on board, and knew nothing of dry land,
except by occasionally setting foot on it.

This is an atom: 
Captain J------ is a very agreeable specimen of the American shipmaster,
--a pleasant, gentlemanly man, not at all refined, and yet with fine and
honorable sensibilities.  Very easy in his manners and conversation, yet
gentle,--talking on freely, and not much minding grammar; but finding a
sufficient and picturesque expression for what he wishes to say; very
cheerful and vivacious; accessible to feeling, as yesterday, when talking
about the recent death of his mother.  His voice faltered, and the tears
came into his eyes, though before and afterwards he smiled merrily, and
made us smile; fond of his wife, and carrying her about the world with
him, and blending her with all his enjoyments; an excellent and sagacious
man of business; liberal in his expenditure; proud of his ship and flag;
always well dressed, with some little touch of sailor-like flashiness,
but not a whit too much; slender in figure, with a handsome face, and
rather profuse brown beard and whiskers; active and alert; about
thirty-two.  A daguerreotype sketch of any conversation of his would do
him no justice, for its slang, its grammatical mistakes, its mistaken
words (as "portable" for "portly"), would represent a vulgar man, whereas
the impression he leaves is by no means that of vulgarity; but he is a
character quite perfect within itself, fit for the deck and the cabin,
and agreeable in the drawing-room, though not amenable altogether to its
rules.  Being so perfectly natural, he is more of a gentleman for those
little violations of rule, which most men, with his opportunities, might
escape.

This is an atom: 
The men whose appeals to the Consul's charity are the hardest to be
denied are those who have no country,---Hungarians, Poles, Cubans,
Spanish-Americans, and French republicans.  All exiles for liberty come
to me, if the representative of America were their representative.
Yesterday, came an old French soldier, and showed his wounds; to-day, a
Spaniard, a friend of Lopez,--bringing his little daughter with him.  He
said he was starving, and looked so.  The little girl was in good
condition enough, and decently dressed.--May 23d.

This is an atom: 
May 30th.--The two past days have been Whitsuntide holidays; and they
have been celebrated at Tranmere in a manner very similar to that of the
old "Election" in Massachusetts, as I remember it a good many years ago,
though the festival has now almost or quite died out.  Whitsuntide was
kept up on our side of the water, I am convinced, under pretence of
rejoicings at the election of Governor.  It occurred at precisely the
same period of the year,--the same week; the only difference being, that
Monday and Tuesday are the Whitsun festival days, whereas, in
Massachusetts, Wednesday was "Election day," and the acme of the
merry-making.

This is an atom: 
I passed through Tranmere yesterday forenoon, and lingered awhile to see
the sports.  The greatest peculiarity of the crowd, to my eye, was that
they seemed not to have any best clothes, and therefore had put on no
holiday suits,--a grimy people, as at all times, heavy, obtuse, with
thick beer in their blood.  Coarse, rough-complexioned women and girls
were intermingled, the girls with no maiden trimness in their attire,
large and blowsy.  Nobody seemed to have been washed that day.  All the
enjoyment was of an exceedingly sombre character, so far as I saw it,
though there was a richer variety of sports than at similar festivals in
America.  There were wooden horses, revolving in circles, to be ridden a
certain number of rounds for a penny; also swinging cars gorgeously
painted, and the newest named after Lord Raglan; and four cars balancing
one another, and turned by a winch; and people with targets and rifles,--
the principal aim being to hit an apple bobbing on a string before the
target; other guns for shooting at the distance of a foot or two, for a
prize of filberts; and a game much in fashion, of throwing heavy sticks
at earthen mugs suspended on lines, three throws for a penny.  Also,
there was a posture-master, showing his art in the centre of a ring of
miscellaneous spectators, and handing round his bat after going through
all his attitudes.  The collection amounted to only one halfpenny, and,
to eke it out, I threw in three more.  There were some large booths with
tables placed the whole length, at which sat men and women drinking and
smoking pipes; orange-girls, a great many, selling the worst possible
oranges, which had evidently been boiled to give them a show of
freshness.  There were likewise two very large structures, the walls made
of boards roughly patched together, and rooted with canvas, which seemed
to have withstood a thousand storms.  Theatres were there, and in front
there were pictures of scenes which were to be represented within; the
price of admission being twopence to one theatre, and a penny to the
other.  But, small as the price of tickets was, I could not see that
anybody bought them.  Behind the theatres, close to the board wall, and
perhaps serving as the general dressing-room, was a large windowed wagon,
in which I suppose the company travel and live together.  Never, to my
imagination, was the mysterious glory that has surrounded theatrical
representation ever since my childhood brought down into such dingy
reality as this.  The tragedy queens were the same coarse and homely
women and girls that surrounded me on the green.  Some of the people had
evidently been drinking more than was good for them; but their
drunkenness was silent and stolid, with no madness in it.  No ebullition
of any sort was apparent.

This is an atom: 
May 31st.--Last Sunday week, for the first time, I heard the note of the
cuckoo.  "Cuck-oo--cuck-oo" it says, repeating the word twice, not in a
brilliant metallic tone, but low and flute-like, without the excessive
sweetness of the flute,--without an excess of saccharine juice in the
sound.  There are said to be always two cuckoos seen together.  The note
is very soft and pleasant.  The larks I have not yet heard in the sky;
though it is not infrequent to hear one singing in a cage, in the streets
of Liverpool.

This is an atom: 
Brewers' draymen are allowed to drink as much of their master's beverage
as they like, and they grow very brawny and corpulent, resembling their
own horses in size, and presenting, one would suppose, perfect pictures
of physical comfort and well-being.  But the least bruise, or even the
hurt of a finger, is liable to turn to gangrene or erysipelas, and become
fatal.

This is an atom: 
When the wind blows violently, however clear the sky, the English say,
"It is a stormy day."  And, on the other hand, when the air is still, and
it does not actually rain, however dark and lowering the sky may be, they
say, "The weather is fine!"

This is an atom: 
June 2d.--The English women of the lower classes have a grace of their
own, not seen in each individual, but nevertheless belonging to their
order, which is not to be found in American women of the corresponding
class.  The other day, in the police court, a girl was put into the
witness-box, whose native graces of this sort impressed me a good deal.
She was coarse, and her dress was none of the cleanest, and nowise smart.
She appeared to have been up all night, too, drinking at the Tranmere
wake, and had since ridden in a cart, covered up with a rug.  She
described herself as a servant-girl, out of place; and her charm lay in
all her manifestations,--her tones, her gestures, her look, her way of
speaking and what she said, being so appropriate and natural in a girl of
that class; nothing affected; no proper grace thrown away by attempting
to appear lady-like,--which an American girl would have attempted,--and
she would also have succeeded in a certain degree.  If each class would
but keep within itself, and show its respect for itself by aiming at
nothing beyond, they would all be more respectable.  But this kind of
fitness is evidently not to be expected in the future; and something else
must be substituted for it.

This is an atom: 
These scenes at the police court are often well worth witnessing.  The
controlling genius of the court, except when the stipendiary magistrate
presides, is the clerk, who is a man learned in the law.  Nominally the
cases are decided by the aldermen, who sit in rotation, but at every
important point there comes a nod or a whisper from the clerk; and it is
that whisper which sets the defendant free or sends him to prison.
Nevertheless, I suppose the alderman's common-sense and native shrewdness
are not without their efficacy in producing a general tendency towards
the right; and, no doubt, the decisions of the police court are quite as
often just as those of any other court whatever.

This is an atom: 
June 11th.--I walked with J----- yesterday to Bebington Church.  When I
first saw this church, nearly two years since, it seemed to me the
fulfilment of my ideal of an old English country church.  It is not so
satisfactory now, although certainly a venerable edifice.  There used
some time ago to be ivy all over the tower; and at my first view of it,
there was still a little remaining on the upper parts of the spire.  But
the main roots, I believe, were destroyed, and pains were taken to clear
away the whole of the ivy, so that now it is quite bare,--nothing but
homely gray stone, with marks of age, but no beauty.  The most curious
thing about the church is the font.  It is a massive pile, composed of
five or six layers of freestone in an octagon shape, placed in the angle
formed by the projecting side porch and the wall of the church, and
standing under a stained-glass window.  The base is six or seven feet
across, and it is built solidly up in successive steps, to the height of
about six feet,--an octagonal pyramid, with the basin of the font
crowning the pile hewn out of the solid stone, and about a foot in
diameter and the same in depth.  There was water in it from the recent
rains,--water just from heaven, and therefore as holy as any water it
ever held in old Romish times.  The aspect of this aged font is extremely
venerable, with moss in the basin and all over the stones; grass, and
weeds of various kinds, and little shrubs, rooted in the chinks of the
stones and between the successive steps.

This is an atom: 
At each entrance of Rock Park, where we live, there is a small Gothic
structure of stone, each inhabited by a policeman and his family; very
small dwellings indeed, with the main apartment opening directly
out-of-doors; and when the door is open, one can see the household fire,
the good wife at work, perhaps the table set, and a throng of children
clustering round, and generally overflowing the threshold.  The policeman
walks about the Park in stately fashion, with his silver-laced blue
uniform and snow-white gloves, touching his hat to gentlemen who reside
in the Park.  In his public capacity he has rather an awful aspect, but
privately he is a humble man enough, glad of any little job, and of old
clothes for his many children, or, I believe, for himself.  One of the
two policemen is a shoemaker and cobbler.  His pay, officially, is
somewhere about a guinea a week.

This is an atom: 
The Park, just now, is very agreeable to look at, shadowy with trees and
shrubs, and with glimpses of green leaves and flower-gardens through the
branches and twigs that line the iron fences.  After a shower the
hawthorn blossoms are delightfully fragrant.  Golden tassels of the
laburnum are abundant.

This is an atom: 
I may have mentioned elsewhere the traditional prophecy, that, when the
ivy should reach the top of Bebbington spire, the tower was doomed to
fall.  It lies still, therefore, a chance of standing for centuries.  Mr.
Turner tells me that the font now used is inside of the church, but the
one outside is of unknown antiquity, and that it was customary, in
papistical time, to have the font without the church.

This is an atom: 
There is a little boy often on board the Rock Ferry steamer with an
accordion,--an instrument I detest; but nevertheless it becomes tolerable
in his hands, not so much for its music, as for the earnestness and
interest with which he plays it.  His body and the accordion together
become one musical instrument on which his soul plays tunes, for he sways
and vibrates with the music from head to foot and throughout his frame,
half closing his eyes and uplifting his face, as painters represent St.
Cecilia and other famous musicians; and sometimes he swings his accordion
in the air, as if in a perfect rapture.  After all, my ears, though not
very nice, are somewhat tortured by his melodies, especially when
confined within the cabin.  The boy is ten years old, perhaps, and rather
pretty; clean, too, and neatly dressed, very unlike all other street and
vagabond children whom I have seen in Liverpool.  People give him their
halfpence more readily than to any other musicians who infest the boat.

This is an atom: 
J-----, the other day, was describing a soldier-crab to his mother, he
being much interested in natural history, and endeavoring to give as
strong an idea as possible of its warlike characteristics, and power to
harm those who molest it.  Little R----- sat by, quietly listening and
sewing, and at last, lifting her head, she remarked, "I hope God did not
hurt himself, when he was making him!"

This is an atom: 
LEAMINGTON.

This is an atom: 
June 21st.--We left Rock Ferry and Liverpool on Monday the 18th by the
rail for this place; a very dim and rainy day, so that we had no pleasant
prospects of the country; neither would the scenery along the Great
Western Railway have been in any case very striking, though sunshine
would have made the abundant verdure and foliage warm and genial.  But a
railway naturally finds its way through all the common places of a
country, and is certainly a most unsatisfactory mode of travelling, the
only object being to arrive.  However, we had a whole carriage to
ourselves, and the children enjoyed the earlier part of the journey very
much.  We skirted Shrewsbury, and I think I saw the old tower of a church
near the station, perhaps the same that struck Falstaff's "long hour."
As we left the town I saw the Wrekin, a round, pointed hill of regular
shape, and remembered the old toast, "To all friends round the Wrekin!"
As we approached Birmingham, the country began to look somewhat
Brummagemish, with its manufacturing chimneys, and pennons of flame
quivering out of their tops; its forges, and great heaps of mineral
refuse; its smokiness and other ugly symptoms.  Of Birmingham itself we
saw little or nothing, except the mean and new brick lodging-houses, on
the outskirts of the town.  Passing through Warwick, we had a glimpse of
the castle,--an ivied wall and two turrets, rising out of imbosoming
foliage; one's very idea of an old castle.  We reached Leamington at a
little past six, and drove to the Clarendon Hotel,--a very spacious and
stately house, by far the most splendid hotel I have yet seen in England.
The landlady, a courteous old lady in black, showed my wife our rooms,
and we established ourselves in an immensely large and lofty parlor, with
red curtains and ponderous furniture, perhaps a very little out of date.
The waiter brought me the book of arrivals, containing the names of all
visitors for from three to five years back.  During two years I estimated
that there had been about three hundred and fifty persons only, and while
we were there, I saw nobody but ourselves to support the great hotel.
Among the names were those of princes, earls, countesses, and baronets;
and when the people of the house heard from R-----'s nurse that I too was
a man of office, and held the title of Honorable in my own country, they
greatly regretted that I entered myself as plain "Mister" in the book.
We found this hotel very comfortable, and might doubtless have made it
luxurious, had we chosen to go to five times the expense of similar
luxuries in America; but we merely ordered comfortable things, and so
came off at no very extravagant rate,--and with great honor, at all
events, in the estimation of the waiter.

This is an atom: 
During the afternoon we found lodgings, and established ourselves in them
before dark.

This is an atom: 
This English custom of lodgings, of which we had some experience at Rhyl
last year, has its advantages; but is rather uncomfortable for strangers,
who, in first settling themselves down, find that they must undertake all
the responsibility of housekeeping at an instant's warming, and cannot
get even a cup of tea till they have made arrangements with the grocer.
Soon, however, there comes a sense of being at home, and by our exclusive
selves, which never can be attained at hotels nor boarding-houses.  Our
house is well situated and respectably furnished, with the dinginess,
however, which is inseparable from lodging-houses,--as if others had used
these things before and would use them again after we had gone,--a
well-enough adaptation, but a lack of peculiar appropriateness; and I
think one puts off real enjoyment from a sense of not being truly fitted.

This is an atom: 
July 1st.--On Friday I took the rail with J----- for Coventry.  It was a
bright and very warm day, oppressively so, indeed; though I think that
there is never in this English climate the pervading warmth of an
American summer day.  The sunshine may be excessively hot, but an
overshadowing cloud or the shade of a tree or of a building at once
affords relief; and if the slightest breeze stirs, you feel the latent
freshness of the air.

This is an atom: 
Coventry is some nine or ten miles from Leamington.  The approach to it
from the railway presents nothing very striking,--a few church-towers,
and one or two tall steeples; and the houses first seen are of modern and
unnoticeable aspect.  Getting into the interior of the town, however, you
find the streets very crooked, and some of them very narrow.  I saw one
place where it seemed possible to shake hands from one jutting storied
old house to another.  There were whole streets of the same kind of
houses, one story impending over another, such as used to be familiar to
me in Salem, and in some streets of Boston.  In fact, the whole aspect of
the town--its irregularity and continual indirectness--reminded me very
much of Boston, as I used to see it, in rare visits thither, when a
child.

This is an atom: 
These Coventry houses, however, many of them, are much larger than any of
similar style that I have seen elsewhere, and they spread into greater
bulk as they ascend, by means of one story jutting over the other.
Probably the New-Englanders continued to follow this fashion of
architecture after it had been abandoned in the mother country.  The old
house built, by Philip English, in Salem, dated about 1692; and it was in
this style,--many gabled, and impending.  Here the edifices of such
architecture seem to be Elizabethan, and of earlier date.  A woman in
Stratford told us that the rooms, very low on the ground-floor, grew
loftier from story to story to the attic.  The fashion of windows, in
Coventry, is such as I have not hitherto seen.  In the highest story, a
window of the ordinary height extends along the whole breadth of the
house, ten, fifteen, perhaps twenty feet, just like any other window of a
commonplace house, except for this inordinate width.  One does not easily
see what the inhabitants want of so much window-light; but the fashion is
very general, and in modern houses, or houses that have been modernized,
this style of window is retained.  Thus young people who grow up amidst
old people contract quaint and old-fashioned manners and aspect.

This is an atom: 
I imagine that these ancient towns--such as Chester and Stratford,
Warwick and Coventry--contain even a great deal more antiquity than meets
the eye.  You see many modern fronts; but if you peep or penetrate
inside, you find an antique arrangement,--old rafters, intricate
passages, and ancient staircases, which have put on merely a new outside,
and are likely still to prove good for the usual date of a new house.
They put such an immense and stalwart ponderosity into their frameworks,
that I suppose a house of Elizabeth's time, if renewed, has at least an
equal chance of durability with one that is new in every part.  All the
hotels in Coventry, so far as I noticed them, are old, with new fronts;
and they have an archway for the admission of vehicles into the
court-yard, and doors opening into the rooms of the building on each side
of the arch.  Maids and waiters are seen darting across the arched
passage from door to door, and it requires a guide (in my case, at least)
to show you the way to the coffee-room or the bar.  I have never been up
stairs in any of them, but can conceive of infinite bewilderment of
zigzag corridors between staircase and chamber.

This is an atom: 
It was fair-day in Coventry, and this gave what no doubt is an unusual
bustle to the streets.  In fact, I have not seen such crowded and busy
streets in any English town; various kinds of merchandise being for sale
in the open air, and auctioneers disposing of miscellaneous wares, pretty
much as they do at musters and other gatherings in the United States.
The oratory of the American auctioneer, however, greatly surpasses that
of the Englishman in vivacity and fun.  But this movement and throng,
together with the white glow of the sun on the pavements, make the scene,
in my recollection, assume an American aspect, and this is strange in so
antique and quaint a town as Coventry.

This is an atom: 
We rambled about without any definite aim, but found our way, I believe,
to most of the objects that are worth seeing.  St. Michael's Church was
most magnificent,--so old, yet enduring; so huge, so rich; with such
intricate minuteness in its finish, that, look as long as you will at it,
you can always discover something new directly before your eyes.  I
admire this in Gothic architecture,--that you cannot master it all at
once, that it is not a naked outline; but, as deep and rich as human
nature itself, always revealing new ideas.  It is as if the builder had
built himself and his age up into it, and as if the edifice had life.
Grecian temples are less interesting to me, being so cold and
crystalline.  I think this is the only church I have seen where there are
any statues still left standing in the niches of the exterior walls.  We
did not go inside.  The steeple of St. Michael's is three hundred and
three feet high, and no doubt the clouds often envelop the tip of the
spire.  Trinity, another church with a tall spire, stands near St.
Michael's, but did not attract me so much; though I, perhaps, might have
admired it equally, had I seen it first or alone.  We certainly know
nothing of church-building in America, and of all English things that I
have seen, methinks the churches disappoint me least.  I feel, too, that
there is something much more wonderful in them than I have yet had time
to know and experience.

This is an atom: 
In the course of the forenoon, searching about everywhere in quest of
Gothic architecture, we found our way into St. Mary's Hall.  The doors
were wide open; it seemed to be public,--there was a notice on the wall
desiring visitors to give nothing to attendants for showing it, and so we
walked in.  I observed, in the guide-books, that we should have obtained
an order for admission from some member of the town council; but we had
none, and found no need of it.  An old woman, and afterwards an old man,
both of whom seemed to be at home on the premises, told us that we might
enter, and troubled neither themselves nor us any further.

This is an atom: 
St. Mary's Hall is now the property of the Corporation of Coventry, and
seems to be the place where the Mayor and Council hold their meetings.
It was built by one of the old guilds or fraternities of merchants and
tradesmen  The woman shut the kitchen door when I approached, so that I
did not see the great fireplaces and huge cooking-utensils which are said
to be there.  Whether these are ever used nowadays, and whether the Mayor
of Coventry gives such hospitable banquets as the Mayor of Liverpool, I
do not know.

This is an atom: 
We went to the Red Lion, and had a luncheon of cold lamb and cold
pigeon-pie.  This is the best way of dining at English hotels,--to call
the meal a luncheon, in which case you will get as good or better a
variety than if it were a dinner, and at less than half the cost.  Having
lunched, we again wandered about town, and entered a quadrangle of gabled
houses, with a church, and its churchyard on one side.  This proved to be
St. John's Church, and a part of the houses were the locality of Bond's
Hospital, for the reception of ten poor men, and the remainder was
devoted to the Bablake School.  Into this latter I peered, with a real
American intrusiveness, which I never found in myself before, but which I
must now assume, or miss a great many things which I am anxious to see.
Running along the front of the house, under the jut of the impending
story, there was a cloistered walk, with windows opening on the
quadrangle.  An arched oaken door, with long iron hinges, admitted us
into a school-room about twenty feet square, paved with brick tiles, blue
and red.  Adjoining this there is a larger school-room which we did not
enter, but peeped at, through one of the inner windows, from the
cloistered walk.  In the room which we entered, there were seven
scholars' desks, and an immense arched fireplace, with seats on each
side, under the chimney, on  a stone slab resting on a brick pedestal.
The opening of the fireplace was at least twelve feet in width.  On one
side of the room were pegs for fifty-two boys' hats and clothes, and
there was a boy's coat, of peculiar cut, hanging on a peg, with the
number "50" in brass upon it.  The coat looked ragged and shabby.  An old
school-book was lying on one of the desks, much tattered, and without a
title; but it seemed to treat wholly of Saints' days and festivals of the
Church.  A flight of stairs, with a heavy balustrade of carved oak,
ascended to a gallery, about eight or nine feet from the lower floor,
which runs along two sides of the room, looking down upon it.  The room
is without a ceiling, and rises into a peaked gable, about twenty feet
high.  There is a large clock in it, and it is lighted by two windows,
each about ten feet wide,--one in the gallery, and the other beneath it.
Two benches or settles, with backs, stood one on each side of the
fireplace.  An old woman in black passed through the room while I was
making my observations, and looked at me, but said nothing.  The school
was founded in 1563, by Thomas Whealby, Mayor of Coventry; the revenue is
about 900 pounds, and admits children of the working-classes at eleven
years old, clothes and provides for them, and finally apprentices them
for seven years.  We saw some of the boys playing in the quadrangle,
dressed in long blue coats or gowns, with cloth caps on their heads.  I
know not how the atmosphere of antiquity, and massive continuance
from age to age, which was the charm to me in this scene of a
charity school-room, can be thrown over it in description.  After noting
down these matters, I looked into the quiet precincts of Bond's Hospital,
which, no doubt, was more than equally interesting; but the old men were
lounging about or lolling at length, looking very drowsy, and I had not
the heart nor the face to intrude among them.  There is something
altogether strange to an American in these charitable institutions,--in
the preservation of antique modes and customs which is effected by them,
insomuch that, doubtless, without at all intending it, the founders have
succeeded in preserving a model of their own long-past age down into the
midst of ours, and how much later nobody can know.

This is an atom: 
We were now rather tired, and went to the railroad, intending to go home;
but we got into the wrong train, and were carried by express, with
hurricane speed, to Bradon, where we alighted, and waited a good while
for the return train to Coventry.  At Coventry again we had more than an
hour to wait, and therefore wandered wearily up into the city, and took
another look at its bustling streets, in which there seems to be a good
emblem of what England itself really is,--with a great deal of antiquity
in it, and which is now chiefly a modification of the old.  The new
things are based and supported on the sturdy old things, and often
limited and impeded by them; but this antiquity is so massive that there
seems to be no means of getting rid of it without tearing society to
pieces.

This is an atom: 
July 2d.--To-day I shall set out on my return to Liverpool, leaving my
family here.

This is an atom: 
TO THE LAKES.

This is an atom: 
July 4th.--I left Leamington on Monday, shortly after twelve, having been
accompanied to the railway station by U---- and J-----, whom I sent away
before the train started.  While I was waiting, a rather gentlemanly,
well-to-do, English-looking man sat down by me, and began to talk of the
Crimea, of human affairs in general, of God and his Providence, of the
coming troubles of the world, and of spiritualism, in a strange free way
for an Englishman, or, indeed, for any man.  It was easy to see that he
was an enthusiast of some line or other.  He being bound for Birmingham
and I for Rugby, we soon had to part; but he asked my name, and told me
his own, which I did not much attend to, and immediately forgot.

This is an atom: 
[Here follows a long account of a visit to Lichfield and Uttoxeter,
condensed in "Our Old Home."]

This is an atom: 
July 6th.--The day after my arrival, by way of Lichfield and Uttoxeter,
at Liverpool, the door of the Consulate opened, and in came the very
sociable personage who accosted me at the railway station at Leamington.
He was on his way towards Edinburgh, to deliver a course of lectures or a
lecture, and had called, he said, to talk with me about spiritualism,
being desirous of having the judgment of a sincere mind on the subject.
In his own mind, I should suppose, he is past the stage of doubt and
inquiry; for he told me that in every action of his life he is governed
by the counsels received from the spiritual world through a medium.  I
did not inquire whether this medium (who is a small boy) had suggested
his visit to me.  My remarks to him were quite of a sceptical character
in regard to the faith to which he had surrendered himself.  He has
formerly lived in America, and had had a son born there.  He gave me a
pamphlet written by himself, on the cure of consumption and other
diseases by antiseptic remedies.  I hope he will not bore me any more,
though he seems to be a very sincere and good man; but these enthusiasts
who adopt such extravagant ideas appear to one to lack imagination,
instead of being misled by it, as they are generally supposed to be.

This is an atom: 
NEWBY BRIDGE.--FOOT OF WINDERMERE.

This is an atom: 
July 13th.--I left Liverpool on Saturday last, by the London and
Northwestern Railway, for Leamington, spent Sunday there, and started on
Monday for the English lakes, with the whole family.  We should not have
taken this journey just now, but I had an official engagement which it
was convenient to combine with a pleasure-excursion.  The first night we
arrived at Chester, and put up at the Albion Hotel, where we found
ourselves very comfortable.  We took the rail at twelve the next day, and
went as far as Milnethorpe station, where we engaged seats in an
old-fashioned stage-coach, and came to Newby Bridge.  I suppose there are
not many of these coaches now running on any road in Great Britain; but
this appears to be the genuine machine, in all respects, and especially
in the round, ruddy coachman, well moistened with ale, good-natured,
courteous, and with a proper sense of his dignity and important position.
U----, J-----, and I mounted atop, S-----, nurse, and R----- got inside,
and we bowled off merrily towards the hearts of the hills.  It was more
than half past nine when we arrived at Newby Bridge, and alighted at the
Swan Hotel, where we now are.

This is an atom: 
It is a very agreeable place: not striking as to scenery, but with a
pleasant rural aspect.  A stone bridge of five arches crosses the river
Severn (which is the communication between Windermere Lake and Morecambe
Bay) close to the house, which sits low--and well sheltered in the lap of
hills,--an old-fashioned inn, where the landlord and his people have a
simple and friendly way of dealing with their guests, and yet provide
them with all sorts of facilities for being comfortable.  They load our
supper and breakfast tables with trout, cold beef, ham, toast, and
muffins; and give us three fair courses for dinner, and excellent wine,
the cost of all which remains to be seen.  This is not one of the
celebrated stations among the lakes; but twice a day the stage-coach
passes from Milnethorpe towards Ulverton, and twice returns, and three
times a little steamer passes to and fro between our hotel and the head
of the lake.  Young ladies, in broad-brimmed hats, stroll about, or row
on the river in the light shallops, of which there are abundance;
sportsmen sit on the benches under the windows of the hotel, arranging
their fishing-tackle; phaetons and post-chaises, with postilions in
scarlet jackets and white breeches, with one high-topped boot, and the
other leathered far up on the leg to guard against friction between the
horses, dash up to the door.  Morning and night comes the stage-coach,
and we inspect the outside passengers, almost face to face with us, from
our parlor-windows, up one pair of stairs.  Little boys, and J----- among
them, spend hours on hours fishing in the clear, shallow river for the
perch, chubs, and minnows that may be seen flashing, like gleams of light
over the flat stones with which the bottom is paved.  I cannot answer for
the other boys, but J----- catches nothing.

This is an atom: 
There are a good many trees on the hills and roundabout, and pleasant
roads loitering along by the gentle river-side, and it has been so sunny
and warm since we came here that we shall have quite a genial
recollection of the place, if we leave it before the skies have time to
frown.  The day after we came, we climbed a high and pretty steep hill,
through a path shadowed with trees and shrubbery, up to a tower, from the
summit of which we had a wide view of mountain scenery and the greater
part of Windermere.  This lake is a lovely little pool among the hills,
long and narrow, beautifully indented with tiny bays and headlands; and
when we saw it, it was one smile (as broad a smile as its narrowness
allowed) with really brilliant sunshine.  All the scenery we have yet met
with is in excellent taste, and keeps itself within very proper bounds,--
never getting too wild and rugged to shock the sensibilities of
cultivated people, as American scenery is apt to do.  On the rudest
surface of English earth, there is seen the effect of centuries of
civilization, so that you do not quite get at naked Nature anywhere.  And
then every point of beauty is so well known, and has been described so
much, that one must needs look through other people's eyes, and feels as
if he were seeing a picture rather than a reality.  Man has, in short,
entire possession of Nature here, and I should think young men might
sometimes yearn for a fresher draught.  But an American likes it.

This is an atom: 
FURNESS ABBEY.

This is an atom: 
Yesterday, July 12th, we took a phaeton and went to Furness Abbey,--a
drive of about sixteen miles, passing along the course of the Leam to
Morecambe Bay, and through Ulverton and other villages.  These villages
all look antique, and the smallest of them generally are formed of such
close, contiguous clusters of houses, and have such narrow and crooked
streets, that they give you an idea of a metropolis in miniature.  The
houses along the road (of which there are not many, except in the
villages) are almost invariably old, built of stone, and covered with a
light gray plaster; generally they have a little flower-garden in front,
and, often, honeysuckles, roses, or some other sweet and pretty rustic
adornment, are flowering over the porch.  I have hardly had such images
of simple, quiet, rustic comfort and beauty, as from the look of these
houses; and the whole impression of our winding and undulating road,
bordered by hedges, luxuriantly green, and not too closely clipped,
accords with this aspect.  There is nothing arid in an English landscape;
and one cannot but fancy that the same may be true of English rural life.
The people look wholesome and well-to-do,--not specimens of hard, dry,
sunburnt muscle, like our yeomen,--and are kind and civil to strangers,
sometimes making a little inclination of the head in passing.  Miss
Martineau, however, does not seem to think well of their mental and moral
condition.

This is an atom: 
We reached Furness Abbey about twelve.  There is a railway station close
by the ruins; and a new hotel stands within the precincts of the abbey
grounds; and continually there is the shriek, the whiz, the rumble, the
bell-ringing, denoting the arrival of the trains; and passengers alight,
and step at once (as their choice may be) into the refreshment-room, to
get a glass of ale or a cigar,--or upon the gravelled paths of the lawn,
leading to the old broken walls and arches of the abbey.  The ruins are
extensive, and the enclosure of the abbey is stated to have covered a
space of sixty-five acres.  It is impossible to describe them.  The most
interesting part is that which was formerly the church, and which, though
now roofless, is still surrounded by walls, and retains the remnants of
the pillars that formerly supported the intermingling curves of the
arches.  The floor is all overgrown with grass, strewn with fragments and
capitals of pillars.  It was a great and stately edifice, the length of
the nave and choir having been nearly three hundred feet, and that of the
transept more than half as much.  The pillars along the nave were
alternately a round, solid one and a clustered one.  Now, what remains of
some of them is even with the ground; others present a stump just high
enough to form a seat; and others are, perhaps, a man's height from the
ground,--and all are mossy, and with grass and weeds rooted into their
chinks, and here and there a tuft of flowers, giving its tender little
beauty to their decay.  The material of the edifice is a soft red stone,
and it is now extensively overgrown with a lichen of a very light gray
line, which, at a little distance, makes the walls look as if they had
long ago been whitewashed, and now had partially returned to their
original color.  The arches of the nave and transept were noble and
immense; there were four of them together, supporting a tower which has
long since disappeared,--arches loftier than I ever conceived to have
been made by man.  Very possibly, in some cathedral that I have seen, or
am yet to see, there may be arches as stately as these; but I doubt
whether they can ever show to such advantage in a perfect edifice as they
do in this ruin,--most of them broken, only one, as far as I recollect,
still completing its sweep.  In this state they suggest a greater majesty
and beauty than any finished human work can show; the crumbling traces of
the half-obliterated design producing somewhat of the effect of the first
idea of anything admirable, when it dawns upon the mind of an artist or a
poet,--an idea which, do what he may, he is sure to fall short of in his
attempt to embody it.

This is an atom: 
In the middle of the choir is a much-dilapidated monument of a
cross-legged knight (a crusader, of course) in armor, very rudely
executed; and, against the wall, lie two or three more bruised and
battered warriors, with square helmets on their heads and visors down.
Nothing can be uglier than these figures; the sculpture of those days
seems to have been far behind the architecture.  And yet they knew how to
put a grotesque expression into the faces of their images, and we saw
some fantastic shapes and heads at the lower points of arches which would
do to copy into Punch.  In the chancel, just at the point below where the
high altar stands, was the burial-place of the old Barons of Kendal.  The
broken crusader, perhaps, represents one of them; and some of their
stalwart bones might be found by digging down.  Against the wall of the
choir, near the vacant space where the altar was, are some stone seats
with canopies richly carved in stone, all quite perfectly preserved,
where the priests used to sit at intervals, during the celebration of
mass.  Conceive all these shattered walls, with here and there an arched
door, or the great arched vacancy of a window; these broken stones and
monuments scattered about; these rows of pillars up and down the nave;
these arches, through which a giant might have stepped, and not needed to
bow his head, unless in reverence to the sanctity of the place,--conceive
it all, with such verdure and embroidery of flowers as the gentle, kindly
moisture of the English climate procreates on all old things, making them
more beautiful than new,--conceive it with the grass for sole pavement of
the long and spacious aisle, and the sky above for the only roof.  The
sky, to be sure, is more majestic than the tallest of those arches; and
yet these latter, perhaps, make the stronger impression of sublimity,
because they translate the sweep of the sky to our finite comprehension.
It was a most beautiful, warm, sunny day, and the ruins had all the
pictorial advantage of bright light and deep shadows.  I must not forget
that birds flew in and out among the recesses, and chirped and warbled,
and made themselves at home there.  Doubtless, the birds of the present
generation are the posterity of those who first settled in the ruins,
after the Reformation; and perhaps the old monks of a still earlier day
may have watched them building about the abbey, before it was a ruin at
all.

This is an atom: 
We had an old description of the place with us, aided by which we traced
out the principal part of the edifice, such as the church, as already
mentioned, and, contiguous to this, the Chapter-house, which is better
preserved than the church; also the kitchen, and the room where the monks
met to talk; and the range of wall, where their cells probably were.  I
never before had given myself the trouble to form any distinct idea of
what an abbey or monastery was,--a place where holy rites were daily and
continually to be performed, with places to eat and sleep contiguous and
convenient, in order that the monks might always be at hand to perform
those rites.  They lived only to worship, and therefore lived under the
same roof with their place of worship, which, of course, was the
principal object in the edifice, and hallowed the whole of it.  We
found, too, at one end of the ruins, what is supposed to have been a
school-house for the children of the tenantry or villeins of the abbey.
All round this room is a bench of stone against the wall, and the
pedestal also of the master's seat.  There are, likewise, the ruins of
the mill; and the mill-stream, which is just as new as ever it was, still
goes murmuring and babbling, and passes under two or three old bridges,
consisting of a low gray arch overgrown with grass and shrubbery.  That
stream was the most fleeting and vanishing thing about the ponderous and
high-piled abbey; and yet it has outlasted everything else, and might
still outlast another such edifice, and be none the worse for wear.

This is an atom: 
There is not a great deal of ivy upon the walls, and though an ivied wall
is a beautiful object, yet it is better not to have too much,--else it is
but one wall of unbroken verdure, on which you can see none of the
sculptural ornaments, nor any of the hieroglyphics of Time.  A sweep of
ivy here and there, with the gray wall everywhere showing through, makes
the better picture; and I think that nothing is so effective as the
little bunches of flowers, a mere handful, that grow in spots where the
seeds have been carried by the wind ages ago.

This is an atom: 
I have made a miserable botch of this description; it is no description,
but merely an attempt to preserve something of the impression it made on
me, and in this I do not seem to have succeeded at all.  I liked the
contrast between the sombreness of the old walls, and the sunshine
falling through them, and gladdening the grass that floored the aisles;
also, I liked the effect of so many idle and cheerful people, strolling
into the haunts of the dead monks, and going babbling about, and peering
into the dark nooks; and listening to catch some idea of what the
building was from a clerical-looking personage, who was explaining it to
a party of his friends.  I don't know how well acquainted this gentleman
might be with the subject; but he seemed anxious not to impart his
knowledge too extensively, and gave a pretty direct rebuff to an honest
man who ventured an inquiry of him.  I think that the railway, and the
hotel within the abbey grounds, add to the charm of the place.  A
moonlight solitary visit might be very good, too, in its way; but I
believe that one great charm and beauty of antiquity is, that we view it
out of the midst of quite another mode of life; and the more perfectly
this can be done, the better.  It can never be done more perfectly than
at Furness Abbey, which is in itself a very sombre scene, and stands,
moreover, in the midst of a melancholy valley, the Saxon name of which
means the Vale of the Deadly Nightshade.

This is an atom: 
The entrance to the stable-yard of the hotel is beneath a pointed arch of
Saxon architecture, and on one side of this stands an old building,
looking like a chapel, but which may have been a porter's lodge.  The
Abbot's residence was in this quarter; and the clerical personage, before
alluded to, spoke of these as the oldest part of the ruins.

This is an atom: 
About half a mile on the hither side of the abbey stands the village of
Dalton, in which is a castle built on a Roman foundation, and which was
afterwards used by the abbots (in their capacity of feudal lords) as a
prison.  The abbey was founded about 1027 by King Stephen, before he came
to the throne; and the faces of himself and of his queen are still to be
seen on one of the walls.

This is an atom: 
We had a very agreeable drive home (our drive hither had been
uncomfortably sunny and hot), and we stopped at Ulverton to buy a pair of
shoes for J----- and some drawing-books and stationery.  As we passed
through the little town in the morning, it was all alive with the bustle
and throng of the weekly market; and though this had ceased on our
return, the streets still looked animated, because the heat of the day
drew most of the population, I should imagine, out of doors.  Old men
look very antiquated here in their old-fashioned coats and breeches,
sunning themselves by the wayside.

This is an atom: 
We reached home somewhere about eight o'clock,--home I see I have called
it; and it seems as homelike a spot as any we have found in England,--the
old inn, close by the bridge, beside the clear river, pleasantly
overshadowed by trees.  It is entirely English, and like nothing that one
sees in America; and yet.  I feel as if I might have lived here a long
while ago, and had now come back because I retained pleasant
recollections of it.  The children, too, make themselves at home.  J-----
spends his time from morning to night fishing for minnows or trout, and
catching nothing at all, and U---- and R----- have been riding between
fields and barn in a hay-cart.  The roads give us beautiful walks along
the river-side, or wind away among the gentle hills; and if we had
nothing else to look at in these walks, the hedges and stone fences would
afford interest enough, so many and pretty are the flowers, roses,
honeysuckles, and other sweet things, and so abundantly does the moss and
ivy grow among the old stones of the fences, which would never have a
single shoot of vegetation on them in America till the very end of time.
But here, no sooner is a stone fence built, than Nature sets to work to
make it a part of herself.  She adopts it and adorns it, as if it were
her own child.  A little sprig of ivy may be seen creeping up the side,
and clinging fast with its many feet; a tuft of grass roots itself
between two of the stones, where a little dust from the road has been
moistened into soil for it: a small bunch of fern grows in another such
crevice; a deep, soft, green moss spreads itself over the top and all
along the sides of the fence; and wherever nothing else will grow,
lichens adhere to the stones and variegate their lines.  Finally, a great
deal of shrubbery is sure to cluster along its extent, and take away all
hardness from the outline; and so the whole stone fence looks as if God
had had at least as much to do with it as man.  The trunks of the trees,
too, exhibit a similar parasitical vegetation.  Parasitical is an unkind
phrase to bestow on this beautiful love and kindness which seems to exist
here between one plant and another; the strong thing--being always ready
to give support and sustenance, and the weak thing to repay with beauty,
so that both are the richer,--as in the case of ivy and woodbine,
clustering up the trunk of a tall tree, and adding Corinthian grace to
its lofty beauty.

This is an atom: 
Mr. W------, our landlord, has lent us a splendid work with engravings,
illustrating the antiquities of Furness Abbey.  I gather from it that the
hotel must have been rebuilt or repaired from an old manor-house, which
was itself erected by a family of Prestons, after the Reformation, and
was a renewal from the Abbot's residence.  Much of the edifice probably,
as it exists now, may have been part of the original one; and there are
bas-reliefs of Scripture subjects, sculptured in stone, and fixed in the
wall of the dining-room, which have been there since the Abbot's time.
This author thinks that what we had supposed to be the school-house (on
the authority of an old book) was really the building for the reception
of guests, with its chapel.  He says that the tall arches in the church
are sixty feet high.  The Earl of Burlington, I believe, is the present
proprietor of the abbey.

This is an atom: 
THE LAKES.

This is an atom: 
July 16th.--On Saturday, we left Newby Bridge, and came by steamboat up
Windermere Lake to Lowwood Hotel, where we now are.  The foot of the lake
is just above Newby Bridge, and it widens from that point, but never to
such a breadth that objects are not pretty distinctly visible from shore
to shore.  The steamer stops at two or three places in the course of its
voyage, the principal one being Bowness, which has a little bustle and
air of business about it proper to the principal port of the lake.  There
are several small yachts, and many skiffs rowing about.  The banks are
everywhere beautiful, and the water, in one portion, is strewn with
islands; few of which are large enough to be inhabitable, but they all
seem to be appropriated, and kept in the neatest order.  As yet, I have
seen no wildness; everything is perfectly subdued and polished and imbued
with human taste, except, indeed, the outlines of the hills, which
continue very much the same as God made them.  As we approached the head
of the lake, the congregation of great hills in the distance became very
striking.  The shapes of these English mountains are certainly far more
picturesque than those which I have seen in Eastern America, where their
summits are almost invariably rounded, as I remember them.  They are
great hillocks, great bunches of earth, similar to one another in their
developments.  Here they have variety of shape, rising into peaks,
falling in abrupt precipices, stretching along in zigzag outlines, and
thus making the most of their not very gigantic masses, and producing a
remarkable effect.

This is an atom: 
We arrived at the Lowwood Hotel, which is very near the head of the lake,
not long after two o'clock.  It stands almost on the shore of Windermere,
with only a green lawn between,--an extensive hotel, covering a good deal
of ground; but low, and rather village-inn-like than lofty.  We found the
house so crowded as to afford us no very comfortable accommodations,
either as to parlor or sleeping-rooms, and we find nothing like the
home-feeling into which we at once settled down at Newby Bridge.  There
is a very pretty vicinity, and a fine view of mountains to the northwest,
sitting together in a family group, sometimes in full sunshine, sometimes
with only a golden gleam on one or two of them, sometimes all in a veil
of cloud, from which here and there a great, dusky head raises itself,
while you are looking at a dim obscurity.  Nearer, there are high, green
slopes, well wooded, but with such decent and well-behaved wood as you
perceive has grown up under the care of man; still no wildness, no
ruggedness,--as how should there be, when, every half-mile or so, a
porter's lodge or a gentleman's gateway indicates that the whole region
is used up for villas.  On the opposite shore of the lake there is a
mimic castle, which I suppose I might have mistaken for a real one two
years ago.  It is a great, foolish toy of gray stone.

This is an atom: 
A steamboat comes to the pier as many as six times a day, and
stage-coaches and omnibuses stop at the door still oftener, communicating
with Ambleside and the town of Windermere, and with the railway, which
opens London and all the world to us.  We get no knowledge of our
fellow-guests, all of whom, like ourselves, live in their own circles,
and are just as remote from us as if the lake lay between.  The only
words I have spoken since arriving here have been to my own family or to
a waiter, save to one or two young pedestrians who met me on a walk, and
asked me the distance to Lowwood Hotel.  "Just beyond here," said I, and
I might stay for months without occasion to speak again.

This is an atom: 
Yesterday forenoon J----- and I walked to Ambleside,--distant barely two
miles.  It is a little town, chiefly of modern aspect, built on a very
uneven hillside, and with very irregular streets and lanes, which
bewilder the stranger as much as those of a larger city.  Many of the
houses look old, and are probably the cottages and farm-houses which
composed the rude village a century ago; but there are stuccoed shops and
dwellings, such as may have been built within a year or two; and three
hotels, one of which has the look of a good old village inn; and the
others are fashionable or commercial establishments.  Through the midst
of the village comes tumbling and rumbling a mountain streamlet, rushing
through a deep, rocky dell, gliding under an old stone inch, and turning,
when occasion calls, the great block of a water-mill.  This is the only
very striking feature of the village,--the stream taking its rough
pathway to the lake as it used to do before the poets had made this
region fashionable.

This is an atom: 
In the evening, just before eight o'clock, I took a walk alone, by a road
which goes up the hill, back of our hotel, and which I supposed might be
the road to the town of Windermere.  But it went up higher and higher,
and for the mile or two that it led me along, winding up, I saw no traces
of a town; but at last it turned into a valley between two high ridges,
leading quite away from the lake, within view of which the town of
Windermere is situated.  It was a very lonely road, though as smooth,
hard, and well kept as any thoroughfare in the suburbs of a city; hardly
a dwelling on either side, except one, half barn, half farm-house, and
one gentleman's gateway, near the beginning of the road, and another more
than a mile above.  At, two or three points there were stone barns, which
are here built with great solidity.  At one place there was a painted
board, announcing that a field of five acres was to be sold, and
referring those desirous of purchasing to a solicitor in London.  The
lake country is but a London suburb.  Nevertheless, the walk was lonely
and lovely; the copses and the broad hillside, the glimpses of the lake,
the great misty company of pikes and fells, beguiled me into a sense of
something like solitude; and the bleating of the sheep, remote and near,
had a like tendency.  Gaining the summit of the hill, I had the best view
of Windermere which I have yet attained,--the best, I should think, that
can be had, though, being towards the south, it brings the softer instead
of the more striking features of the landscape into view.  But it shows
nearly the whole extent of the lake, all the way from Lowwood, beyond
Newby Bridge, and I think there can hardly be anything more beautiful in
the world.  The water was like a strip and gleam of sky, fitly set among
lovely slopes of earth.  It was no broader than many a river, and yet you
saw at once that it could be no river, its outline being so different
from that of a running stream, not straight nor winding, but stretching
to one side or the other, as the shores made room for it.

This is an atom: 
This morning it is raining, and we are not very comfortable nor
contented, being all confined to our little parlor, which has a broken
window, against which I have pinned The Times to keep out the chill damp
air.  U---- has been ill, in consequence of having been overheated at
Newby Bridge.  We have no books, except guide-books, no means of
amusement, nothing to do.  There are no newspapers, and I shall remember
Lowwood not very agreeably.  As far as we are concerned, it is a
scrambling, ill-ordered hotel, with insufficient attendance, wretched
sleeping-accommodations, a pretty fair table, but German-silver forks
and spoons; our food does not taste very good, and yet there is really no
definite fault to be found with it.

This is an atom: 
Since writing the above, I have found the first volume of Sir Charles
Grandison, and two of G. P. R. James's works, in the coffee-room.  The
days pass heavily here, and leave behind them a sense of having answered
no very good purpose.  They are long enough, at all events, for the sun
does not set till after eight o'clock, and rises I know not when.  One of
the most remarkable distinctions between England and the United States is
the ignorance into which we fall of whatever is going on in the world the
moment we get away from the great thoroughfares and centres of life.  In
Leamington we heard no news from week's end to week's end, and knew not
where to find a newspaper; and here the case is neither better nor worse.
The rural people really seem to take no interest in public affairs; at
all events, they have no intelligence on such subjects.  It is possible
that the cheap newspapers may, in time, find their way into the cottages,
or, at least, into the country taverns; but it is not at all so now.  If
they generally know that Sebastopol is besieged, it is the extent of
their knowledge.  The public life of America is lived through the mind
and heart of every man in it; here the people feel that they have nothing
to do with what is going forward, and, I suspect, care little or nothing
about it.  Such things they permit to be the exclusive concern of the
higher classes.

This is an atom: 
In front of our hotel, on the lawn between us and the lake, there are two
trees, which we have hitherto taken to be yews; but on examining them
more closely, I find that they are pine-trees, and quite dead and dry,
although they have the aspect of dark rich life.  But this is caused by
the verdure of two great ivy-vines, which have twisted round them like
gigantic snakes, and, clambering up and throttling the life out of them,
have put out branches, and made crowns of thick green leaves, so that, at
a little distance, it is quite impossible not to take them for genuine
trees.  The trunks of the ivy-vines must be more than a foot in
circumference, and one feels they have stolen the life that belonged to
the pines.  The dead branches of one of the pines stick out horizontally
through the ivy-boughs.  The other shows nothing but the ivy, and in
shape a good deal resembles a poplar.  When the pine trunks shall have
quite crumbled away, the ivy-stems will doubtless have gained sufficient
strength to sustain themselves independently.

This is an atom: 
July 19th.--Yesterday S----- went down the lake in the steamboat to take
U----, baby, and nurse to Newby Bridge, while the three rest of us should
make a tour through the lake region.  After mamma's departure, and when I
had finished some letters, J----- and I set out on a walk, which finally
brought us to Bowness, through much delightful shade of woods, and past
beautiful rivulets or brooklets, and up and down many hills.  This chief
harbor of the lakes seemed alive and bustling with tourists, it being a
sunny and pleasant day, so that they were all abroad, like summer
insects.  The town is a confused and irregular little place, of very
uneven surface.  There is an old church in it, and two or three large
hotels.  We stayed there perhaps half an hour, and then went to the pier,
where shortly a steamer arrived, with music sounding,--on the deck of
which, with her back to us, sat a lady in a gray travelling-dress.
J----- cried out, "Mamma! mamma!" to which the lady deigned no notice,
but, he repeating it, she turned round, and was as much surprised, no
doubt, to see her husband and son, as if this little lake had been the
great ocean, and we meeting each other from opposite shores of it.  We
soon steamed back to Lowwood, and took a car thence for Rydal and
Grasmere, after a cold luncheon.  At Bowness I met Miss Charlotte
Cushman, who has been staying at the Lowwood Hotel with us since Monday,
without either party being aware of it.

This is an atom: 
Our road to Rydal lay through Ambleside, which is certainly a very pretty
town, and looks cheerfully in a sunny day.  We saw Miss Martineau's
residence, called "The Knoll," standing high up on a hillock, and having
at its foot a Methodist chapel, for which, or whatever place of Christian
worship, this good lady can have no occasion.  We stopped a moment in the
street below her house, and deliberated a little whether to call on her;
but concluded we would not.

This is an atom: 
After leaving Ambleside, the road winds in and out among the hills, and
soon brings us to a sheet (or napkin, rather than a sheet) of water,
which the driver tells us is Rydal Lake!  We had already heard that it
was but three quarters of a mile long, and one quarter broad; still, it
being an idea of considerable size in our minds, we had inevitably drawn
its ideal, physical proportions on a somewhat corresponding scale.  It
certainly did look very small; and I said, in my American scorn, that I
could carry it away easily in a porringer; for it is nothing more than a
grass-bordered pool among the surrounding hills which ascend directly
from its margin; so that one might fancy it, not, a permanent body of
water, but a rather extensive accumulation of recent rain.  Moreover, it
was rippled with a breeze, and so, as I remember it, though the sun
shone, it looked dull and sulky, like a child out of humor.  Now, the
best thing these small ponds can do is to keep perfectly calm and smooth,
and not attempt to show off any airs of their own, but content themselves
with serving as a mirror for whatever of beautiful or picturesque there
may be in the scenery around them.  The hills about Rydal Water are not
very lofty, but are sufficiently so as objects of every-day view,--
objects to live with; and they are craggier than those we have hitherto
seen, and bare of wood, which indeed would hardly grow on some of their
precipitous sides.

This is an atom: 
On the roadside, as we reach the foot of the lake, stands a spruce and
rather large house of modern aspect, but with several gables and much
overgrown with ivy,--a very pretty and comfortable house, built, adorned,
and cared for with commendable taste.  We inquired whose it was, and the
coachman said it was "Mr. Wordsworth's," and that "Mrs. Wordsworth was
still residing there."  So we were much delighted to have seen his abode,
and as we were to stay the night at Grasmere, about two miles farther on,
we determined to come back and inspect it as particularly as should be
allowable.  Accordingly, after taking rooms at Brown's Hotel, we drove
back in our return car, and, reaching the head of Rydal Water, alighted
to walk through this familiar scene of so many years of Wordsworth's
life.  We ought to have seen De Quincey's former residence and Hartley
Coleridge's cottage, I believe, on our way, but were not aware of it at
the time.  Near the lake there is a stone-quarry, and a cavern of some
extent, artificially formed, probably by taking out the stone.  Above the
shore of the lake, not a great way from Wordsworth's residence, there is
a flight of steps hewn in a rock and ascending to a rock seat where a
good view of the lake may be attained; and, as Wordsworth has doubtless
sat there hundreds of times, so did we ascend and sit down, and look at
the hills and at the flags on the lake's shore.

This is an atom: 
Reaching the house that had been pointed out to us as Wordsworth's
residence, we began to peer about at its front and gables, and over the
garden wall, on both sides of the road, quickening our enthusiasm as much
as we could, and meditating to pilfer some flower or ivy-leaf from the
house or its vicinity, to be kept as sacred memorials.  At this juncture
a man approached, who announced himself as the gardener of the place, and
said, too, that this was not Wordsworth's house at all, but the residence
of Mr. Ball, a Quaker gentleman; but that his ground adjoined
Wordsworth's, and that he had liberty to take visitors through the
latter.  How absurd it would have been if we had carried away ivy-leaves
and tender recollections from this domicile of a respectable Quaker!  The
gardener was an intelligent man, of pleasant, sociable, and respectful
address; and as we went along he talked about the poet, whom he had
known, and who, he said, was very familiar with the country people.  He
led us through Mr. Ball's grounds, up a steep hillside, by winding,
gravelled walks, with summer-houses at points favorable for them.  It was
a very shady and pleasant spot, containing about an acre of ground, and
all turned to good account by the manner of laying it out; so that it
seemed more than it really is.  In one place, on a small, smooth slab of
slate, let into a rock, there is an inscription by Wordsworth, which I
think I have read in his works, claiming kindly regards from those who
visit the spot after his departure, because many trees had been spared at
his intercession.  His own grounds, or rather his ornamental garden, is
separated from Mr. Ball's only by a wire fence, or some such barrier, and
the gates have no fastening, so that the whole appears like one
possession, and doubtless was so as regarded the poet's walks and
enjoyments.  We approached by paths so winding that I hardly know how the
house stands in relation to the road; but, after much circuity, we really
did see Wordsworth's residence,--an old house with an uneven ridge-pole,
built of stone, no doubt, but plastered over with some neutral tint,--a
house that would not have been remarkably pretty in itself, but so
delightfully situated, so secluded, so hedged about with shrubbery, and
adorned with flowers, so ivy-grown on one side, so beautified with the
personal care of him who lived in it and loved it, that it seemed the
very place for a poet's residence; and as if, while he lived so long in
it, his poetry had manifested itself in flowers, shrubbery, and ivy.  I
never smelt such a delightful fragrance of flowers as there was all
through the garden.  In front of the house there is a circular terrace of
two ascents, in raising which Wordsworth had himself performed much of
the labor; and here there are seats, from which we obtained a fine view
down the valley of the Rothay, with Windermere in the distance,--a view
of several miles, and which we did not suppose could be seen, after
winding among the hills so far from the lake.  It is very beautiful and
picture-like.  While we sat here, S----- happened to refer to the ballad
of little Barbara Lewthwaite, and J----- began to repeat the poem
concerning her, and the gardener said that "little Barbara" had died not
a great while ago, an elderly woman, leaving grown-up children behind
her.  Her marriage-name was Thompson, and the gardener believed there was
nothing remarkable in her character.

This is an atom: 
There is a summer-house at one extremity of the grounds, in deepest
shadow, but with glimpses of mountain views through trees which shut it
in, and which have spread intercepting boughs since Wordsworth died.  It
is lined with pine-cones, in a pretty way enough, but of doubtful taste.
I rather wonder that people of real taste should help Nature out, and
beautify her, or perhaps rather prettify her so much as they do,--opening
vistas, showing one thing, hiding another, making a scene picturesque,
whether or no.  I cannot rid myself of the feeling that there is
something false--a kind of humbug--in all this.  At any rate, the traces
of it do not contribute to my enjoyment, and, indeed, it ought to be done
so exquisitely as to leave no trace.  But I ought not to criticise in any
way a spot which gave me so much pleasure, and where it is good to think
of Wordsworth in quiet, past days, walking in his home-shadow of trees
which he knew, and training flowers, and trimming shrubs, and chanting in
an undertone his own verses up and down the winding walks.

This is an atom: 
The gardener gave J----- a cone from the summer-house, which had fallen
on the seat, and S----- got some mignonette, and leaves of laurel and ivy,
and we wended our way back to the hotel.  Wordsworth was not the owner of
this house; it being the property of Lady Fleming.  Mrs. Wordsworth still
lives there, and is now at home.

This is an atom: 
Five o'clock.---All day it has been cloudy and showery, with thunder now
and then; the mists hang low on the surrounding hills, adown which, at
various points, we can see the snow-white fall of little streamlets
("forces" they call them here) swollen by the rain.  An overcast day is
not so gloomy in the hill-country as in the lowlands; there are more
breaks, more transfusion of skylight through the gloom, as has been the
case to-day, and as I found in Lenox; we get better acquainted with
clouds by seeing at what height they be on the hillsides, and find that
the difference betwixt a fair day and a cloudy and rainy one is very
superficial, after all.  Nevertheless, rain is rain, and wets a man just
as much among the mountains as anywhere else; so we have been kept within
doors all day, till an hour or so ago, when J----- and I went down to the
village in quest of the post-office.

This is an atom: 
We took a path that leads from the hotel across the fields, and, coming
into a wood, crosses the Rothay by a one-arched bridge and passes the
village church.  The Rothay is very swift and turbulent to-day, and
hurries along with foam-specks on its surface, filling its banks from
brim to brim,--a stream perhaps twenty feet wide, perhaps more; for I am
willing that the good little river should have all it can fairly claim.
It is the St. Lawrence of several of these English lakes, through which
it flows, and carries off their superfluous waters.  In its haste, and
with its rushing sound, it was pleasant both to see and hear; and it
sweeps by one side of the old churchyard where Wordsworth lies buried,---
the side where his grave is made.  The church of Grasmere is a very plain
structure, with a low body, on one side of which is a small porch with a
pointed arch.  The tower is square and looks ancient; but the whole is
overlaid with plaster of a buff or pale yellow hue.  It was originally
built, I suppose, of rough shingly stones, as many of the houses
hereabouts are now, and, like many of them, the plaster is used to give a
finish.  We found the gate of the churchyard wide open; and the grass was
lying on the graves, having probably been mowed yesterday.  It is but a
small churchyard, and with few monuments of any pretension in it, most of
them being slate headstones, standing erect.  From the gate at which we
entered, a distinct foot-track leads to the corner nearest the riverside,
and I turned into it by a sort of instinct, the more readily as I saw a
tourist-looking man approaching from that point, and a woman looking
among the gravestones.  Both of these persons had gone by the time I came
up, so that J----- and I were left to find Wordsworth's grave all by
ourselves.

This is an atom: 
At this corner of the churchyard there is a hawthorn bush or tree, the
extremest branches of which stretch as far as where Wordsworth lies.
This whole corner seems to be devoted to himself and his family and
friends; and they all lie very closely together, side by side, and head
to foot, as room could conveniently be found.  Hartley Coleridge lies a
little behind, in the direction of the church, his feet being towards
Wordsworth's head, who lies in the row of those of his own blood.  I
found out Hartley Coleridge's grave sooner than Wordsworth's; for it is
of marble, and, though simple enough, has more of sculptured device about
it, having been erected, as I think the inscription states, by his
brother and sister.  Wordsworth has only the very simplest slab of slate,
with "William Wordsworth" and nothing else upon it.  As I recollect it,
it is the midmost grave of the row.  It is or has been well grass-grown,
but the grass is quite worn away from the top, though sufficiently
luxuriant at the sides.  It looks as if people had stood upon it, and so
does the grave next to it, which I believe is one of his children.  I
plucked some grass and weeds from it, and as he was buried within so few
years they may fairly be supposed to have drawn their nutriment from his
mortal remains, and I gathered them from just above his head.  There is
no fault to be found with his grave,--within view of the hills, within
sound of the river, murmuring near by,--no fault except that he is
crowded so closely with his kindred; and, moreover, that, being so old a
churchyard, the earth over him must all have been human once.  He might
have had fresh earth to himself; but he chose this grave deliberately.
No very stately and broad-based monument can ever be erected over it
without infringing upon, covering, and overshadowing the graves, not only
of his family, but of individuals who probably were quite disconnected
with him.  But it is pleasant to think and know--were it but on the
evidence of this choice of a resting-place--that he did not care for a
stately monument.

This is an atom: 
After leaving the churchyard, we wandered about in quest of the
post-office, and for a long time without success.  This little town of
Grasmere seems to me as pretty a place as ever I met with in my life.  It
is quite shut in by hills that rise up immediately around it, like a
neighborhood of kindly giants.  These hills descend steeply to the verge
of the level on which the village stands, and there they terminate at
once, the whole site of the little town being as even as a floor.  I call
it a village; but it is no village at all,--all the dwellings standing
apart, each in its own little domain, and each, I believe, with its own
little lane leading to it, independently of the rest.  Most of these are
old cottages, plastered white, with antique porches, and roses and other
vines trained against them, and shrubbery growing about them; and some
are covered with ivy.  There are a few edifices of more pretension and of
modern build, but not so strikingly so as to put the rest out of
countenance.  The post-office, when we found it, proved to be an ivied
cottage, with a good deal of shrubbery round it, having its own pathway,
like the other cottages.  The whole looks like a real seclusion, shut out
from the great world by these encircling hills, on the sides of which,
whenever they are not too steep, you see the division lines of property,
and tokens of cultivation,--taking from them their pretensions to savage
majesty, but bringing them nearer to the heart of man.

This is an atom: 
Since writing the above, I have been again with S----- to see
Wordsworth's grave, and, finding the door of the church open, we went in.
A woman and little girl were sweeping at the farther end, and the woman
came towards us out of the cloud of dust which she had raised.  We were
surprised at the extremely antique appearance of the church.  It is
paved with bluish-gray flagstones, over which uncounted generations have
trodden, leaving the floor as well laid as ever.  The walls are very
thick, and the arched windows open through them at a considerable
distance above the floor.  There is no middle aisle; but first a row of
pews next either wall, and then an aisle on each side of the pews,
occupying the centre of the church,--then, two side aisles, but no
middle one.  And down through the centre or the church runs a row of
five arches, very rude and round-headed, all of rough stone, supported
by rough and massive pillars, or rather square, stone blocks, which
stand in the pews, and stood in the same places probably, long before
the wood of those pews began to grow. Above this row of arches is
another row, built upon the same mass of stone, and almost as broad, but
lower; and on this upper row rests the framework, the oaken beams, the
black skeleton of the roof.  It is a very clumsy contrivance for
supporting the roof, and if it were modern, we certainly should condemn
it as very ugly; but being the relic of a simple age it comes in well
with the antique simplicity of the whole structure. The roof goes up,
barn-like, into its natural angle, and all the rafters and cross-beams
are visible.  There is an old font; and in the chancel is a niche,
where (judging from a similar one in Furness Abbey) the holy water used
to be placed for the priest's use while celebrating mass.  Around the
inside of the porch is a stone bench, against the wall, narrow and
uneasy, but where a great many people had sat, who now have found
quieter resting-places.

This is an atom: 
The woman was a very intelligent-looking person, not of the usual English
ruddiness, but rather thin and somewhat pale, though bright, of aspect.
Her way of talking was very agreeable.  She inquired if we wished to see
Wordsworth's monument, and at once showed it to us,--a slab of white
marble fixed against the upper end of the central row of stone arches,
with a pretty long inscription, and a profile bust, in bas-relief, of his
aged countenance.  The monument, is placed directly over Wordsworth's
pew, and could best be seen and read from the very corner seat where he
used to sit.  The pew is one of those occupying the centre of the church,
and is just across the aisle from the pulpit, and is the best of all for
the purpose of seeing and hearing the clergyman, and likewise as
convenient as any, from its neighborhood to the altar.  On the other side
of the aisle, beneath the pulpit, is Lady Fleming's pew.  This and one or
two others are curtained, Wordsworth's was not.  I think I can bring up
his image in that corner seat of his pew--a white-headed, tall, spare
man, plain in aspect--better than in any other situation.  The woman said
that she had known him very well, and that he had made some verses on a
sister of hers.  She repeated the first lines, something about a lamb,
but neither S----- nor I remembered them.

This is an atom: 
On the walls of the chancel there are monuments to the Flemings, and
painted escutcheons of their arms; and along the side walls also, and on
the square pillars of the row of arches, there are other monuments,
generally of white marble, with the letters of the inscription blackened.
On these pillars, likewise, and in many places in the walls, were hung
verses from Scripture, painted on boards.  At one of the doors was a
poor-box,--an elaborately carved little box, of oak, with the date 1648,
and the name of the church--St. Oswald's--upon it.  The whole interior of
the edifice was plain, simple, almost to grimness,--or would have been
so, only that the foolish church-wardens, or other authority, have washed
it over with the same buff color with which they have overlaid the
exterior.  It is a pity; it lightens it up, and desecrates it greatly,
especially as the woman says that there were formerly paintings on the
walls, now obliterated forever.  I could have stayed in the old church
much longer, and could write much more about it, but there must be an end
to everything.  Pacing it from the farther end to the elevation before
the altar, I found that it was twenty-five paces long.

This is an atom: 
On looking again at the Rothay, I find I did it some injustice; for at
the bridge, in its present swollen state, it is nearer twenty yards than
twenty feet across.  Its waters are very clear, and it rushes along with
a speed which is delightful to see, after an acquaintance with the muddy
and sluggish Avon and Leam.

This is an atom: 
Since tea I have taken a stroll from the hotel in a different direction
from heretofore, and passed the Swan Inn, where Scott used to go daily to
get a draught of liquor, when he was visiting Wordsworth, who had no wine
nor other inspiriting fluid in his house.  It stands directly on the
wayside,--a small, whitewashed house, with an addition in the rear that
seems to have been built since Scott's time.  On the door is the painted
sign of a swan, and the name "Scott's Swan Hotel."  I walked a
considerable distance beyond it, but, a shower cooling up, I turned back,
entered the inn, and, following the mistress into a snug little room, was
served with a glass of bitter ale.  It is a very plain and homely inn,
and certainly could not have satisfied Scott's wants if he had required
anything very far-fetched or delicate in his potations.  I found two
Westmoreland peasants in the room, with ale before them.  One went away
almost immediately; but the other remained, and, entering into
conversation with him, he told me that he was going to New Zealand, and
expected to sail in September.  I announced myself as an American, and he
said that a large party had lately gone from hereabouts to America; but
he seemed not to understand that there was any distinction between Canada
and the States.  These people had gone to Quebec.  He was a very civil,
well-behaved, kindly sort of person, of a simple character, which I took
to belong to the class and locality, rather than to himself individually.
I could not very well understand all that he said, owing to his
provincial dialect; and when he spoke to his own countrymen, or to the
women of the house, I really could but just catch a word here and there.
How long it takes to melt English down into a homogeneous mass!  He told
me that there was a public library in Grasmere to which he has access in
common with the other inhabitants, and a reading-room connected with it,
where he reads The Times in the evening.  There was no American smartness
in his mind.  When I left the house, it was showering briskly; but the
drops quite ceased, and the clouds began to break away before I reached
my hotel, and I saw the new moon over my right shoulder.

This is an atom: 
July 21st.--We left Grasmere yesterday, after breakfast; it being a
delightful morning, with some clouds, but the cheerfullest sunshine on
great part of the mountainsides and on ourselves.  We returned, in the
first place, to Ambleside, along the border of Grasmere Lake, which would
be a pretty little piece of water, with its steep and high surrounding
hills, were it not that a stubborn and straight-lined stone fence,
running along the eastern shore, by the roadside, quite spoils its
appearance.  Rydal Water, though nothing can make a lake of it, looked
prettier and less diminutive than at the first view; and, in fact, I find
that it is impossible to know accurately how any prospect or other thing
looks, until after at least a second view, which always essentially
corrects the first.  This, I think, is especially true in regard to
objects which we have heard much about, and exercised our imagination
upon; the first view being a vain attempt to reconcile our idea with the
reality, and at the second we begin to accept the thing for what it
really is.  Wordsworth's situation is really a beautiful one; and Nab
Scaur behind his house rises with a grand, protecting air.  We passed
Nab's cottage, in which De Quincey formerly lived, and where Hartley
Coleridge lived and died.  It is a small, buff-tinted, plastered stone
cottage, immediately on the roadside, and originally, I should think, of
a very humble class; but it now looks as if persons of taste might some
time or other have sat down in it, and caused flowers to spring up about
it.  It is very agreeably situated under the great, precipitous hill, and
with Rydal Water close at band, on the other side of the road.  An
advertisement of lodgings to let was put up on this cottage.

This is an atom: 
I question whether any part of the world looks so beautiful as England--
this part of England, at least--on a fine summer morning.  It makes one
think the more cheerfully of human life to see such a bright universal
verdure; such sweet, rural, peaceful, flower-bordered cottages,--not
cottages of gentility, but dwellings of the laboring poor; such nice
villas along the roadside, so tastefully contrived for comfort and
beauty, and adorned more and more, year after year, with the care and
after-thought of people who mean to live in them a great while, and feel
as if their children might live in them also, and so they plant trees to
overshadow their walks, and train ivy and all beautiful vines up against
their walls, and thus live for the future in another sense than we
Americans do.  And the climate helps them out, and makes everything
moist, and green, and full of tender life, instead of dry and arid, as
human life and vegetable life is so apt to be with us.  Certainly,
England can present a more attractive face than we can; even in its
humbler modes of life, to say nothing of the beautiful lives that might
be led, one would think, by the higher classes, whose gateways, with
broad, smooth gravelled drives leading through them, one sees every mile
or two along the road, winding into some proud seclusion.  All this is
passing away, and society most assume new relations; but there is no harm
in believing that there has been something very good in English life,--
good for all classes while the world was in a state out of which these
forms naturally grew.

This is an atom: 
Passing through Ambleside, our phaeton and pair turned towards Ullswater,
which we were to reach through the Pass of Kirkstone.  This is some three
or four miles from Ambleside, and as we approached it the road kept
ascending higher and higher, the hills grew more bare, and the country
lost its soft and delightful verdure.  At last the road became so steep
that J----- and I alighted to walk.  This is the aspiring road that
Wordsworth speaks of in his ode; it passes through the gorge of
precipitous hills,--or almost precipitous,--too much so for even the
grass to grow on many portions, which are covered with gray smugly
stones; and I think this pass, in its middle part, must have looked just
the same when the Romans marched through it as it looks now.  No trees
could ever have grown on the steep hillsides, whereon even the English
climate can generate no available soil.  I do not know that I have seen
anything more impressive than the stern gray sweep of these naked
mountains, with nothing whatever to soften or adorn them.  The notch of
the White Mountains, as I remember it in my youthful days, is more
wonderful and richly picturesque, but of quite a different character.

This is an atom: 
About the centre and at the highest point of the pass stands an old stone
building of mean appearance, with the usual sign of an alehouse,
"Licensed to retail foreign spirits, ale, and tobacco," over the door,
and another small sign, designating it as the highest inhabitable house
in England.  It is a chill and desolate place for a residence.  They keep
a visitor's book here, and we recorded our names in it, and were not
too sorry to leave the mean little hovel, smelling as it did of
tobacco-smoke, and possessing all other characteristics of the humblest
alehouse on the level earth.

This is an atom: 
The Kirkstone, which gives the pass its name, is not seen in approaching
from Ambleside, until some time after you begin to descend towards
Brothers' Water.  When the driver first pointed it out, a little way up
the hill on our left, it looked no more than a bowlder of a ton or two in
weight, among a hundred others nearly as big; and I saw hardly any
resemblance to a church or church-spire, to which the fancies of past
generations have likened it.  As we descended the pass, however, and left
the stone farther and farther behind, it continued to show itself, and
assumed a more striking and prominent aspect, standing out clearly
relieved against the sky, so that no traveller would fail to observe it,
where there are so few defined objects to attract notice, amid the naked
monotony of the stern hills; though, indeed, if I had taken it for any
sort of an edifice, it would rather have been for a wayside inn or a
shepherd's hut than for a church.  We lost sight of it, and again beheld
it more and more brought out against the sky, by the turns of the road,
several times in the course of our descent.  There is a very fine view of
Brothers' Water, shut in by steep hills, as we go down Kirkstone Pass.

This is an atom: 
At about half past twelve we reached Patterdale, at the foot of
Ullswater, and here took luncheon.  The hotels are mostly very good all
through this region, and this deserved that character.  A black-coated
waiter, of more gentlemanly appearance than most Englishmen, yet taking a
sixpence with as little scruple as a lawyer would take his fee; the
mistress, in lady-like attire, receiving us at the door, and waiting upon
us to the carriage-steps; clean, comely housemaids everywhere at hand,--
all appliances, in short, for being comfortable, and comfortable, too,
within one's own circle.  And, on taking leave, everybody who has done
anything for you, or who might by possibility have done anything, is to
be feed.  You pay the landlord enough, in all conscience; and then you
pay all his servants, who have been your servants for the time.  But, to
say the truth, there is a degree of the same kind of annoyance in an
American hotel, although it is not so much an acknowledged custom.  Here,
in the houses where attendance is not charged in the bill, no wages are
paid by the host to those servants--chambermaid, waiter, and boots--who
come into immediate contact with travellers.  The drivers of the cars,
phaetons, and flys are likewise unpaid, except by their passengers, and
claim threepence a mile with the same sense of right as their masters in
charging for the vehicles and horses.  When you come to understand this
claim, not as an appeal to your generosity, but as an actual and
necessary part of the cost of the journey, it is yielded to with a more
comfortable feeling; and the traveller has really option enough, as to
the amount which he will give, to insure civility and good behavior on
the driver's part.

This is an atom: 
Ullswater is a beautiful lake, with steep hills walling it about, so
steep, on the eastern side, that there seems hardly room for a road to
run along the base.  We passed up the western shore, and turned off from
it about midway, to take the road towards Keswick.  We stopped, however,
at Lyulph's Tower, while our chariot went on up a hill, and took a guide
to show us the way to Airey Force,--a small cataract, which is claimed as
private property, and out of which, no doubt, a pretty little revenue is
raised.  I do not think that there can be any rightful appropriation, as
private property, of objects of natural beauty.  The fruits of the land,
and whatever human labor can produce from it, belong fairly enough to the
person who has a deed or a lease; but the beautiful is the property of
him who can hive it and enjoy it.  It is very unsatisfactory to think of
a cataract under lock and key.  However, we were shown to Airey Force by
a tall and graceful mountain-maid, with a healthy cheek, and a step that
had no possibility of weariness in it.  The cascade is an irregular
streak of foamy water, pouring adown a rude shadowy glen.  I liked well
enough to see it; but it is wearisome, on the whole, to go the rounds of
what everybody thinks it necessary to see.  It makes me a little ashamed.
It is somewhat as if we were drinking out of the same glass, and eating
from the same dish, as a multitude of other people.

This is an atom: 
Within a few miles of Keswick, we passed along at the foot of Saddleback,
and by the entrance of the Vale of St. John, and down the valley, on one
of the slopes, we saw the Enchanted Castle.  Thence we drove along by the
course of the Greta, and soon arrived at Keswick, which lies at the base
of Skiddaw, and among a brotherhood of picturesque eminences, and is
itself a compact little town, with a market-house, built of the old
stones of the Earl of Derwentwater's ruined castle, standing in the
centre,--the principal street forking into two as it passes it.  We
alighted at the King's Arms, and went in search of Southey's residence,
which we found easily enough, as it lies just on the outskirts of the
town.  We inquired of a group of people, two of whom, I thought, did not
seem to know much about the matter; but the third, an elderly man,
pointed it out at once,--a house surrounded by trees, so as to be seen
only partially, and standing on a little eminence, a hundred yards or so
from the road.

This is an atom: 
We went up a private lane that led to the rear of the place, and so
penetrated quite into the back-yard without meeting anybody,--passing a
small kennel, in which were two hounds, who gazed at us, but neither
growled nor wagged their tails.  The house is three stories high, and
seems to have a great deal of room in it, so as not to discredit its
name, "Greta Hall,"--a very spacious dwelling for a poet.  The windows
were nearly all closed; there were no signs of occupancy, but a general
air of neglect.  S-----, who is bolder than I in these matters, ventured
through what seemed a back garden gate, and I soon heard her in
conversation with some man, who now presented himself, and proved to be a
gardener.  He said he had formerly acted in that capacity for Southey,
although a gardener had not been kept by him as a regular part of his
establishment.  This was an old man with an odd crookedness of legs, and
strange, disjointed limp.  S----- had told him that we were Americans, and
he took the idea that we had come this long distance, over sea and land,
with the sole purpose of seeing Southey's residence, so that he was
inclined to do what he could towards exhibiting it.  This was but little;
the present occupant (a Mr. Radday, I believe the gardener called him)
being away, and the house shut up.

This is an atom: 
But he showed us about the grounds, and allowed us to peep into the
windows of what had been Southey's library, and into those of another of
the front apartments, and showed us the window of the chamber in the
rear, in which Southey died.  The apartments into which we peeped looked
rather small and low,--not particularly so, but enough to indicate an old
building.  They are now handsomely furnished, and we saw over one of the
fireplaces an inscription about Southey; and in the corner of the same
room stood a suit, of bright armor.  It is taller than the country-houses
of English gentlemen usually are, and it is even stately.  All about, in
front, beside it and behind, there is a great profusion of trees, most of
which were planted by Southey, who came to live here more than fifty
years ago, and they have, of course, grown much more shadowy now than he
ever beheld them; for he died about fourteen years since.  The grounds
are well laid out, and neatly kept, with the usual lawn and gravelled
walks, and quaint little devices in the ornamental way.  These may be of
later date than Southey's time.  The gardener spoke respectfully of
Southey, and of his first wife, and observed that "it was a great loss to
the neighborhood when that family went down."

This is an atom: 
The house stands directly above the Greta, the murmur of which is audible
all about it; for the Greta is a swift little river, and goes on its way
with a continual sound, which has both depth and breadth.  The gardener
led us to a walk along its banks, close by the Hall, where he said
Southey used to walk for hours and hours together.  He might, indeed, get
there from his study in a moment.  There are two paths, one above the
other, well laid out on the steep declivity of the high bank; and there
is such a very thick shade of oaks and elms, planted by Southey himself
over the bank, that all the ground and grass were moist, although it had
been a sunny day.  It is a very sombre walk; not many glimpses of the sky
through those dense boughs.  The Greta is here, perhaps, twenty yards
across, and very dark of hue, and its voice is melancholy and very
suggestive of musings and reveries; but I should question whether it were
favorable to any settled scheme of thought.  The gardener told us that
there used to be a pebbly beach on the margin of the river, and that it
was Southey's habit to sit and write there, using a tree of peculiar
shape for a table.  An alteration in the current of the river has swept
away the beach, and the tree, too, has fallen.  All these things were
interesting to me, although Southey was not, I think, a picturesque man,
--not one whose personal character takes a strong hold on the
imagination.  In these walks he used to wear a pair of shoes heavily
clamped with iron; very ponderous they must have been, from the
particularity with which the gardener mentioned them.

This is an atom: 
The gardener took leave of us at the front entrance of the grounds, and,
returning to the King's Arms, we ordered a one-horse fly for the fall of
Lodore.  Our drive thither was along the banks of Derwentwater, and it is
as beautiful a road, I imagine, as can be found in England or anywhere
else.  I like Derwentwater the best of all the lakes, so far as I have
yet seen them.  Skiddaw lies at the head of a long even ridge of
mountains, rising into several peaks, and one higher than the rest.  On
the eastern side there are many noble eminences, and on the west, along
which we drove, there is a part of the way a lovely wood, and nearly the
whole distance a precipitous range of lofty cliffs, descending sheer down
without any slope, except what has been formed in the lapse of ages by
the fall of fragments, and the washing down of smaller stones.  The
declivity thus formed along the base of the cliffs is in some places
covered with trees or shrubs; elsewhere it is quite bare and barren.  The
precipitous parts of the cliffs are very grand; the whole scene, indeed,
might be characterized as one of stern grandeur with an embroidery of
rich beauty, without lauding it too much.  All the sternness of it is
softened by vegetative beauty wherever it can possibly be thrown in; and
there is not here, so strongly as along Windermere, evidence that human
art has been helping out Nature.  I wish it were possible to give any
idea of the shapes of the hills; with these, at least, man has nothing to
do, nor ever will have anything to do.  As we approached the bottom of
the lake, and of the beautiful valley in which it lies, we saw one hill
that seemed to crouch down like a Titanic watch-dog, with its rear
towards the spectator, guarding the entrance to the valley.  The great
superiority of these mountains over those of New England is their variety
and definiteness of shape, besides the abundance everywhere of water
prospects, which are wanting among our own hills.  They rise up
decidedly, and each is a hill by itself, while ours mingle into one
another, and, besides, have such large bases that you can tell neither
where they begin nor where they end.  Many of these Cumberland mountains
have a marked vertebral shape, so that they often look like a group of
huge lions, lying down with their backs turned toward each other.  They
slope down steeply from narrow ridges; hence their picturesque seclusions
of valleys and dales, which subdivide the lake region into so many
communities.  Our hills, like apple-dumplings in a dish, have no such
valleys as these.

This is an atom: 
There is a good inn at Lodore,--a small, primitive country inn, which has
latterly been enlarged and otherwise adapted to meet the convenience of
the guests brought thither by the fame of the cascade; but it is still a
country inn, though it takes upon itself the title of hotel.

This is an atom: 
We found pleasant rooms here, and established ourselves for the night.
From this point we have a view of the beautiful lake, and of Skiddaw at
the head of it.  The cascade is within three or four minutes' walk,
through the garden gate, towards the cliff, at the base of which the inn
stands.  The visitor would need no other guide than its own voice, which
is said to be audible sometimes at the distance of four miles.  As we
were coming from Keswick, we caught glimpses of its white foam high up
the precipice; and it is only glimpses that can be caught anywhere,
because there is no regular sheet of falling water.  Once, I think, it
must have fallen abruptly over the edge of the long line of precipice
that here extends along parallel with the shore of the lake; but, in the
course of time, it has gnawed and sawed its way into the heart of the
cliff,--this persistent little stream,--so that now it has formed a rude
gorge, adown which it hurries and tumbles in the wildest way, over the
roughest imaginable staircase.  Standing at the bottom of the fall, you
have a far vista sloping upward to the sky, with the water everywhere as
white as snow, pouring and pouring down, now on one side of the gorge,
now on the other, among immense bowlders, which try to choke its passage.
It does not attempt to leap over these huge rocks, but finds its way in
and out among then, and finally gets to the bottom after a hundred
tumbles.  It cannot be better described than in Southey's verses, though
it is worthy of better poetry than that.  After all, I do not know that
the cascade is anything more than a beautiful fringe to the grandeur of
the scene; for it is very grand,--this fissure through the cliff,--with a
steep, lofty precipice on the right hand, sheer up and down, and on the
other hand, too, another lofty precipice, with a slope of its own ruin on
which trees and shrubbery have grown.  The right-hand precipice, however,
has shelves affording sufficient hold for small trees, but nowhere does
it slant.  If it were not for the white little stream falling gently
downward, and for the soft verdure upon either precipice, and even along
the very pathway of the cascade, it would be a very stern vista up that
gorge.

This is an atom: 
I shall not try to describe it any more.  It has not been praised too
much, though it may have been praised amiss.  I went thither again in the
morning, and climbed a good way up, through the midst of its rocky
descent, and I think I could have reached the top in this way.  It is
remarkable that the bounds of the water, from one step of its broken
staircase to another, give an impression of softness and gentleness; but
there are black, turbulent pools among the great bowlders, where the
stream seems angry at the difficulties which it meets with.  Looking
upward in the sunshine, I could see a rising mist, and I should not
wonder if a speck of rainbow were sometimes visible.  I noticed a small
oak in the bed of the cascade, and there is a lighter vegetation
scattered about.

This is an atom: 
At noon we took a car for Portinscale, and drove back along the road to
Keswick, through which we passed, stopping to get a perhaps of letters at
the post-office, and reached Portinscale, which is a mile from Keswick.
After dinner we walked over a bridge, and through a green lane, to the
church where Southey is buried.  It is a white church, of Norman
architecture, with a low, square tower.  As we approached, we saw two
persons entering the portal, and, following them in, we found the sexton,
who was a tall, thin old man, with white hair, and an intelligent,
reverent face, showing the edifice to a stout, red-faced, self-important,
good-natured John Bull of a gentleman.  Without any question on our part,
the old sexton immediately led us to Southey's monument, which is placed
in a side aisle, where there is not breadth for it to stand free of the
wall; neither is it in a very good light.  But, it seemed to me a good
work of art,--a recumbent figure of white marble, on a couch, the drapery
of which he has drawn about him,--being quite enveloped in what may be a
shroud.  The sculptor has not intended to represent death, for the figure
lies on its side, and has a book in its hand, and the face is lifelike,
and looks full of expression,--a thin, high-featured, poetic face, with a
finely proportioned head and abundant hair.  It represents Southey
rightly, at whatever age he died, in the full maturity of manhood, when
he was strongest and richest.  I liked the statue, and wished that it lay
in a broader aisle, or in the chancel, where there is an old tomb of a
knight and lady of the Ratcliffe family, who have held the place of honor
long enough to yield it now to a poet.  Southey's sculptor was Lough.  I
must not forget to mention that John Bull, climbing on a bench, to get a
better view of the statue, tumbled off with a racket that resounded
irreverently through the church.

This is an atom: 
The old, white-headed, thin sexton was a model man of his class, and
appeared to take a loving and cheerful interest in the building, and in
those who, from age to age, have worshipped and been buried there.  It is
a very ancient and interesting church.  Within a few years it has been
thoroughly repaired as to the interior, and now looks as if it might
endure ten more centuries; and I suppose we see little that is really
ancient, except the double row of Norman arches, of light freestone, that
support the oaken beams and rafters of the roof.  All the walls, however,
are venerable, and quite preserve the identity of the edifice.  There is
a stained-glass window of modern manufacture, and in one of the side
windows, set amidst plain glass, there is a single piece, five hundred
years old, representing St. Anthony, very finely executed, though it
looks a little faded.  Along the walls, on each side, between the arched
windows, there are marble slabs affixed, with inscriptions to the
memories of those who used to occupy the seats beneath.  I remember none
of great antiquity, nor any old monument, except that in the chancel,
over the knight and lady of the Ratcliffe family.  This consists of a
slab of stone, on four small stone pillars, about two feet high.  The
slab is inlaid with a brass plate, on which is sculptured the knight in
armor, and the lady in the costume of Elizabeth's time, exceedingly well
done and well preserved, and each figure about eighteen inches in length.
The sexton showed us a rubbing of them on paper.  Under the slab, which,
supported by the low stone pillars, forms a canopy for them, lie two
sculptured figures of stone, of life size, and at full length,
representing the same persons; but I think the sculptor was hardly equal
in his art to the engraver.

This is an atom: 
The most-curious antique relic in the church is the font.  The bowl is
very capacious, sufficiently so to admit of the complete immersion of a
child of two or three months old.  On the outside, in several
compartments, there are bas-reliefs of Scriptural and symbolic subjects,
--such as the tree of life, the word proceeding out of God's mouth, the
crown of thorns,--all in the quaintest taste, sculptured by some hand of
a thousand years ago, and preserving the fancies of monkish brains, in
stone.  The sexton was very proud of this font and its sculpture, and
took a kindly personal interest, in showing it; and when we had spent as
much time as we could inside, he led us to Southey's grave in the
churchyard.  He told us that he had known Southey long and well, from
early manhood to old age; for he was only twenty-nine when he came to
Keswick to reside.  He had known Wordsworth too, and Coleridge, and
Lovell; and he had seen Southey and Wordsworth walking arm in arm
together in that churchyard.  He seemed to revere Southey's memory, and
said that he had been much lamented, and that as many as a hundred people
came to the churchyard when he was buried.  He spoke with great praise of
Mrs. Southey, his first wife, telling of her charity to the poor, and how
she was a blessing to the neighborhood; but he said nothing in favor of
the second Mrs. Southey, and only mentioned her selling the library, and
other things, after her husband's death, and going to London.  Yet I
think she was probably a good woman, and meets with less than justice
because she took the place of another good woman, and had not time and
opportunity to prove herself as good.  As for Southey himself, my idea
is, that few better or more blameless men have ever lived; but he seems
to lack color, passion, warmth, or something that should enable me to
bring him into close relation with myself.  The graveyard where his body
lies is not so rural and picturesque as that where Wordsworth is buried;
although Skiddaw rises behind it, and the Greta is murmuring at no very
great distance away.  But the spot itself has a somewhat bare and bold
aspect, with no shadow of trees, no shrubbery.

This is an atom: 
Over his grave there is a ponderous, oblong block of slate, a native
mineral of this region, as hard as iron, and which will doubtless last
quite as long as Southey's works retain any vitality in English
literature.  It is not a monument fit for a poet.  There is nothing airy
or graceful about it,--and, indeed, there cannot be many men so solid and
matter-of-fact as to deserve a tomb like that.  Wordsworth's grave is
much better, with only a simple headstone, and the grass growing over his
mortality, which, for a thousand years, at least, it never can over
Southey's.  Most of the monuments are of this same black slate, and some
erect headstones are curiously sculptured, and seem to have been recently
erected.

This is an atom: 
We now returned to the hotel, and took a car for the valley of St. John.
The sky seemed to portend rain in no long time, and Skiddaw had put on
his cap; but the people of the hotel and the driver said that there would
be no rain this afternoon, and their opinion proved correct.  After
driving a few miles, we again cane within sight of the Enchanted Castle.
It stands rather more than midway adown the declivity of one of the
ridges that form the valley to the left, as you go southward, and its
site would have been a good one for a fortress, intended to defend the
lower entrance of this mountain defile.  At a proper distance, it looks
not unlike the gray dilapidation of a Gothic castle, which has been
crumbling and crumbling away for ages, until Time might be supposed to
have imperceptibly stolen its massive pile from man, and given it back to
Nature; its towers and battlements and arched entrances being so much
defaced and decayed that all the marks of human labor had nearly been
obliterated, and the angles of the hewn stone rounded away, while mosses
and weeds and bushes grow over it as freely as over a natural ledge of
rocks.  It is conceivable that in some lights, and in some states of the
atmosphere, a traveller, at the entrance of the valley, might really
imagine that he beheld a castle here; but, for myself, I must acknowledge
that it required a willing fancy to make me see it.  As we drew nearer,
the delusion did not immediately grow less strong; but, at length, we
found ourselves passing at the foot of the declivity, and, behold! it was
nothing but an enormous ledge of rock, coming squarely out of the
hillside, with other parts of the ledge cropping out in its vicinity.
Looking back, after passing, we saw a knoll or hillock, of which the
castled rock is the bare face.  There are two or three stone cottages
along the roadside, beneath the magic castle, and within the enchanted
ground.  Scott, in the Bridal of Triermain, locates the castle in the
middle of the valley, and makes King Arthur ride around it, which any
mortal would have great difficulty in doing.  This vale of St. John has
very striking scenery.  Blencathra shuts it in to the northward, lying
right across the entrance; and on either side there are lofty crags and
declivities, those to the west being more broken and better wooded than
the ridge to the eastward, which stretches along for several miles,
steep, high, and bare, producing only grass enough for sheep pasture,
until it rises into the dark brow of Helvellyn.  Adown this ridge, seen
afar, like a white ribbon, comes here and there a cascade, sending its
voice before it, which distance robs of all its fury, and makes it the
quietest sound in the world; and while you see the foamy leap of its
upper course a mile or two away, you may see and hear the selfsame little
brook babbling through a field, and passing under the arch of a rustic
bridge beneath your feet.  It is a deep seclusion, with mountains and
crags on all sides.

This is an atom: 
About a mile beyond the castle we stopped at a little wayside inn, the
King's Head, and put up for the night.  This, I believe, is the only inn
which I have found in England--the only one where I have eaten and slept
--that does not call itself a hotel.  It is very primitive in its
arrangements,--a long, low, whitewashed, unadorned, and ugly cottage of
two stories.  At one extremity is a barn and cow-house, and next to these
the part devoted to the better class of guests, where we had our parlor
and chambers, contiguous to which is the kitchen and common room, paved
with flagstones,--and, lastly, another barn and stable; all which
departments are not under separate roofs, but under the same long
contiguity, and forming the same building.  Our parlor opens immediately
upon the roadside, without any vestibule.  The house appears to be of
some antiquity, with beams across the low ceilings; but the people made
us pretty comfortable at bed and board, and fed us with ham and eggs,
veal-steaks, honey, oatcakes, gooseberry-tarts, and such cates and
dainties,--making a moderate charge for all.  The parlor was adorned with
rude engravings.  I remember only a plate of the Duke of Wellington, at
three stages of his life; and there were minerals, delved, doubtless, out
of the hearts of the mountains, upon the mantel-piece.  The chairs were
of an antiquated fashion, and had very capacious seats.  We were waited
upon by two women, who looked and acted not unlike the countryfolk of New
England,--say, of New Hampshire,--except that these may have been more
deferential.

This is an atom: 
While we remained here, I took various walks to get a glimpse of
Helvellyn, and a view of Thirlmere,--which is rather two lakes than one,
being so narrow at one point as to be crossed by a foot-bridge.  Its
shores are very picturesque, coming down abruptly upon it, and broken
into crags and prominences, which view their shaggy faces in its mirror;
and Helvellyn slopes steeply upward, from its southern shore, into the
clouds.  On its eastern bank, near the foot-bridge, stands Armboth House,
which Miss Martineau says is haunted; and I saw a painted board at the
entrance of the road which leads to it advertising lodgings there.  The
ghosts, of course, pay nothing for their accommodations.

This is an atom: 
At noon, on the day after our arrival, J----- and I went to visit the
Enchanted Castle; and we were so venturesome as to turn aside from the
road, and ascend the declivity towards its walls, which indeed we hoped
to surmount.  It proved a very difficult undertaking, the site of the
fortress being much higher and steeper than we had supposed; but we did
clamber upon what we took for the most elevated portion, when lo! we
found that we had only taken one of the outworks, and that there was a
gorge of the hill betwixt us and the main walls; while the citadel rose
high above, at more than twice the elevation which we had climbed.
J----- wished to go on, and I allowed him to climb, till he appeared to
have reached so steep and lofty a height that he looked hardly bigger
than a monkey, and I should not at all have wondered had he come rolling
down to the base of the rock where I sat.  But neither did he get
actually within the castle, though he might have done so but for a high
stone fence, too difficult for him to climb, which runs from the rock
along the hillside.  The sheep probably go thither much oftener than any
other living thing, and to them we left the castle of St. John, with a
shrub waving from its battlements, instead of a banner.

This is an atom: 
After dinner we ordered a car for Ambleside, and while it was getting
ready, I went to look at the river of St. John, which, indeed, flows
close beside our inn, only just across the road, though it might well be
overlooked unless you specially sought for it.  It is a brook brawling
over the stones, very much as brooks do in New England, only we never
think of calling them rivers there.  I could easily have made a leap from
shore to shore, and J----- scrambled across on no better footing than a
rail.  I believe I have complained of the want of brooks in other parts
of England, but there is no want of them here, and they are always
interesting, being of what size they may.

This is an atom: 
We drove down the valley, and gazed at the vast slope of Helvellyn, and
at Thirlmere beneath it, and at Eagle's Crag and Raven's Crag, which
beheld themselves in it, and we cast many a look behind at Blencathra,
and that noble brotherhood of mountains out of the midst of which we
came.  But, to say the truth, I was weary of fine scenery, and it seemed
to me that I had eaten a score of mountains, and quaffed as many lakes,
all in the space of two or three days,--and the natural consequence was a
surfeit.  There was scarcely a single place in all our tour where I
should not have been glad to spend a month; but, by flitting so quickly
from one point to another, I lost all the more recondite beauties, and
had come away without retaining even the surface of much that I had seen.
I am slow to feel,--slow, I suppose, to comprehend, and, like the
anaconda, I need to lubricate any object a great deal before I can
swallow it and actually make it my own.  Yet I shall always enjoy having
made this journey, and shall wonder the more at England, which
comprehends so much, such a rich variety, within its narrow bounds.  If
England were all the world, it still would have been worth while for the
Creator to have made it, and mankind would have had no cause to find
fault with their abode; except that there is not room enough for so many
as might be happy here.

This is an atom: 
We left the great inverted arch of the valley behind us, looking back as
long as we could at Blencathra, and Skiddaw over its shoulder, and the
clouds were gathering over them at our last glimpse.  Passing by Dummail
Raise (which is a mound of stones over an old British king), we entered
Westmoreland, and soon had the vale of Grasmere before us, with the
church where Wordsworth lies, and Nab Scaur and Rydal Water farther on.
At Ambleside we took another car for Newby Bridge, whither we drove along
the eastern shore of Windermere.  The superb scenery through which we had
been passing made what we now saw look tame, although a week ago we
should have thought it more than commonly interesting.  Hawkshead is the
only village on our road,--a small, whitewashed old town, with a
whitewashed old Norman church, low, and with a low tower, on the same
pattern with others that we have seen hereabouts.  It was between seven
and eight o'clock when we reached Newby Bridge, and heard U----'s voice
greeting us, and saw her head, crowned with a wreath of flowers, looking
down at us, out of the window of our parlor.

This is an atom: 
And to-day, July 23d, I have written this most incomplete and
unsatisfactory record of what we have done and seen since Wednesday last.
I am pretty well convinced that all attempts at describing scenery,
especially mountain scenery, are sheer nonsense.  For one thing, the
point of view being changed, the whole description, which you made up
from the previous point of view, is immediately falsified.  And when you
have done your utmost, such items as those setting forth the scene in a
play,--"a mountainous country, in the distance a cascade tumbling over a
precipice, and in front a lake; on one side an ivy-covered cottage,"--
this dry detail brings the matter before one's mind's eyes more
effectually than all the art of word-painting.

This is an atom: 
July 27th.--We are still at Newby Bridge, and nothing has occurred of
remarkable interest, nor have we made any excursions, beyond moderate
walks.  Two days have been rainy, and to-day there is more rain.  We find
such weather as tolerable here as it would probably be anywhere; but it
passes rather heavily with the children,--and for myself, I should prefer
sunshine.  Though Mr. White's books afford me some entertainment,
especially an odd volume of Ben Jonson's plays, containing "Volpone,"
"The Alchemist," "Bartholomew Fair," and others.  "The Alchemist" is
certainly a great play.  We watch all arrivals and other events from our
parlor window,--a stage-coach driving up four times in the twenty-four
hours, with its forlorn outsiders, all saturated with rain; the steamer,
from the head of the lake, landing a crowd of passengers, who stroll up
to the hotel, drink a glass of ale, lean over the parapet of the bridge,
gaze at the flat stones which pave the bottom of the Liver, and then
hurry back to the steamer again; cars, phaetons, horsemen, all damped and
disconsolate.  There are a number of young men staying at the hotel, some
of whom go forth in all the rain, fishing, and come back at nightfall,
trudging heavily, but with creels on their backs that do not seem very
heavy.  Yesterday was fair, and enlivened us a good deal.  Returning from
a walk in the forenoon, I found a troop of yeomanry cavalry in the
stable-yard of the hotel.  They were the North Lancashire Regiment, and
were on their way to Liverpool for the purpose of drill.  Not being old
campaigners, their uniforms and accoutrements were in so much the finer
order, all bright, and looking span-new, and they themselves were a body
of handsome and stalwart young men; and it was pleasant to look at their
helmets, and red jackets and carbines, and steel scabbarded swords, and
gallant steeds,--all so martial in aspect,--and to know that they were
only play-soldiers, after all, and were never likely to do nor suffer any
warlike mischief.  By and by their bugles sounded, and they trotted away,
wheeling over the ivy-grown stone bridge, and disappearing behind the
trees on the Milnethorpe road.  Our host comes forth from the bar with a
bill, which he presents to an orderly-sergeant.  He, the host, then tells
me that he himself once rode many years, a trooper, in this regiment, and
that all his comrades were larger men than himself.  Yet Mr. Thomas White
is a good-sized man, and now, at all events, rather overweight for a
dragoon.

This is an atom: 
Yesterday came one of those bands of music that seem to itinerate
everywhere about the country.  It consisted of a young woman who played
the harp, a bass-viol player, a fiddler, a flutist, and a bugler, besides
a little child, of whom, I suppose, the woman was the mother.  They sat
down on a bench by the roadside, opposite the house, and played several
tunes, and by and by the waiter brought them a large pitcher of ale,
which they quaffed with apparent satisfaction; though they seemed to be
foreigners by their mustachios and sallow hue, and would perhaps have
preferred a vinous potation.  One would like to follow these people
through their vagrant life, and see them in their social relations, and
overhear their talk with each other.  All vagrants are interesting; and
there is a much greater variety of them here than in America,--people who
cast themselves on Fortune, and take whatever she gives without a
certainty of anything.  I saw a travelling tinker yesterday,--a man with
a leather apron, and a string of skewers hung at his girdle, and a pack
over his shoulders, in which, no doubt, were his tools and materials of
trade.

This is an atom: 
It is remarkable what a natural interest everybody feels in fishing.  An
angler from the bridge immediately attracts a group to watch his luck.
It is the same with J-----, fishing for minnows, on the platform near
which the steamer lands its passengers.  By the by, U---- caught a minnow
last evening, and, immediately after, a good-sized perch,--her first
fish.

This is an atom: 
July 30th.--We left Newby Bridge, all of us, on Saturday, at twelve
o'clock, and steamed up the lake to Ambleside; a pretty good day as to
weather, but with a little tendency to shower.  There was nothing new on
the lake, and no new impressions, as far as I can remember.  At
Ambleside, S----- and nurse went shopping, after which we took a carriage
for Grasmere, and established ourselves at Brown's Hotel.  I find that my
impressions from our previous sight of all these scenes do not change on
revision.  They are very beautiful; but, if I must say it, I am a little
weary of them.  We soon tire of things which we visit merely by way of
spectacle, and with which we have no real and permanent connection.  In
such cases we very quickly wish the spectacle to be taken away, and
another substituted; at all events I do not care about seeing anything
more of the English lakes for at least a year.

This is an atom: 
Perhaps a part of my weariness is owing to the hotel-life which we lead.
At an English hotel the traveller feels as if everybody, from the
landlord downward, united in a joint and individual purpose to fleece
him, because all the attendants who come in contact with him are to be
separately considered.  So, after paying, in the first instance, a very
heavy bill, for what would seem to cover the whole indebtedness, there
remain divers dues still to be paid, to no trifling amount, to the
landlord's servants,--dues not to be ascertained, and which you never can
know whether you have properly satisfied.  You can know, perhaps, when
you have less than satisfied them, by the aspect of the waiter, which I
wish I could describe, not disrespectful in the slightest degree, but a
look of profound surprise, a gaze at the offered coin (which he
nevertheless pockets) as if he either did not see it, or did not know it,
or could not believe his eyesight;--all this, however, with the most
quiet forbearance, a Christian-like non-recognition of an unmerited wrong
and insult; and finally, all in a moment's space indeed, he quits you and
goes about his other business.  If you have given him too much, you are
made sensible of your folly by the extra amount of his gratitude, and the
bows with which he salutes you from the doorstep.  Generally, you cannot
very decidedly say whether you have been right or wrong; but, in almost
all cases, you decidedly feel that you have been fleeced.  Then the
living at the best of English hotels, so far as my travels have brought
me acquainted with them, deserves but moderate praise, and is especially
lacking in variety.  Nothing but joints, joints, joints; sometimes,
perhaps, a meat-pie, which, if you eat it, weighs upon your conscience,
with the idea that you have eaten the scraps of other people's dinners.
At the lake hotels, the fare is lamb and mutton and grout,--the latter
not always fresh, and soon tired of.  We pay like nabobs, and are
expected to be content with plain mutton.

This is an atom: 
We spent the day yesterday at Grasmere, in quiet walks about the hotel;
and at a little past six in the afternoon, I took my departure in the
stage-coach for Windermere.  The coach was greatly overburdened with
outside passengers,--fifteen in all, besides the four insiders, and one
of the fifteen formed the apex of an immense pile of luggage on the top.
It seems to me miraculous that we did not topple over, the road being so
hilly and uneven, and the driver, I suspect, none the steadier for his
visits to all the tap-rooms along the route from Cockermouth.  There was
a tremendous vibration of the coach now and then; and I saw that, in case
of our going over, I should be flung headlong against the high stone
fence that bordered most of the road.  In view of this I determined to
muffle my head in the folds of my thick shawl at the moment of overturn,
and as I could do no better for myself, I awaited my fate with
equanimity.  As far as apprehension goes, I had rather travel from Maine
to Georgia by rail, than from Grasmere to Windermere by stage-coach.

This is an atom: 
At Lowwood, the landlady espied me from the window, and sent out a large
packet that had arrived by mail; but as it was addressed to some person
of the Christian name of William, I did not venture to open it.  She
said, also, that a gentleman had been there, who very earnestly desired
to see me, and I have since had reason to suppose that this was
Allingham, the poet.  We arrived at Windermere at half past seven, and
waited nearly an hour for the train to start.  I took a ticket for
Lancaster, and talked there about the war with a gentleman in the
coffee-room, who took me for an Englishman, as most people do nowadays,
and I heard from him--as you may from all his countrymen--an expression
of weariness and dissatisfaction with the whole business.  These fickle
islanders!  How differently they talked a year ago!  John Bull sees now
that he never was in a worse predicament in his life; and yet it would
not take much to make him roar as bellicosely as ever.  I went to bed at
eleven, and slept unquietly on feathers.

This is an atom: 
I had purposed to rise betimes, and see the town of Lancaster before
breakfast.  But here I reckoned without my host; for, in the first place,
I had no water for my ablutions, and my boots were not brushed; and so I
could not get down stairs till the hour I named for my coffee and chops;
and, secondly, the breakfast was delayed half an hour, though promised
every minute.  In fine, I had but just time to take a hasty walk round
Lancaster Castle, and see what I could of the town on my way,--a not very
remarkable town, built of stone, with taller houses than in the middle
shires of England, narrow streets up and down an eminence on which the
castle is situated, with the town immediately about it.  The castle is a
satisfactory edifice, but so renovated that the walls look almost
entirely modern, with the exception of the fine old front, with the
statue of an armed warrior, very likely John of Gaunt himself, in a niche
over the Norman arch of the entrance.  Close beside the castle stands an
old church.

This is an atom: 
The train left Lancaster at half past nine, and reached Liverpool at
twelve, over as flat and uninteresting a country as I ever travelled.  I
have betaken myself to the Rock Ferry Hotel, where I am as comfortable as
I could be anywhere but at home; but it is rather comfortless to think of
hone as three years off, and three thousand miles away.  With what a
sense of utter weariness, not fully realized till then, we shall sink
down on our own threshold, when we reach it.  The moral effect of being
without a settled abode is very wearisome.

This is an atom: 
Our coachman from Grasmere to Windermere looked like a great beer-barrel,
oozy with his proper liquor.  I suppose such solid soakers never get
upset.

This is an atom: 
THE LAUNCH.

This is an atom: 
August 2d.--Mr. ------ has urged me very much to go with his father and
family to see the launch of a great ship which has been built for their
house, and afterwards to partake of a picnic; so, on Tuesday morning I
presented myself at the landing-stage, and met the party, to take passage
for Chester.  It was a showery morning, and looked wofully like a rainy
day; but nothing better is to be expected in England; and, after all,
there is seldom such a day that you cannot glide about pretty securely
between the drops of rain.  This, however, did not turn out one of those
tolerable days, but grew darker and darker, and worse and worse; and was
worst of all when we had passed about six miles beyond Chester, and were
just on the borders of Wales, on the hither side of the river Dee, where
the ship was to be launched.  Here the train stopped, and absolutely
deposited our whole party of excursionists, under a heavy shower, in the
midst of a muddy potato-field, whence we were to wade through mud and
mire to the ship-yard, almost half a mile off.  Some kind Christian, I
know not whom, gave me half of his umbrella, and half of his cloak, and
thereby I got to a shed near the ship, without being entirely soaked
through.

This is an atom: 
The ship had been built on the banks of the Dee, at a spot where it is
too narrow for her to be launched directly across, and so she lay
lengthwise of the river, and was so arranged as to take the water
parallel with the stream.  She is, for aught I know, the largest ship in
the world; at any rate, longer than the Great Britain,--an iron-screw
steamer,--and looked immense and magnificent, and was gorgeously dressed
out in flags.  Had it been a pleasant day, all Chester and half Wales
would have been there to see the launch; and, in spite of the rain, there
were a good many people on the opposite shore, as well as on our side;
and one or two booths, and many of the characteristics of a fair,--that
is to say, men and women getting intoxicated without any great noise and
confusion.

This is an atom: 
The ship was expected to go off at about twelve o'clock, and at that
juncture all Mr. ------'s friends assembled under the bows of the ship,
where we were a little sheltered from the rain by the projection of that
part of the vessel over our heads.  The bottle of port-wine with which
she was to be christened was suspended from the bows to the platform
where we stood by a blue ribbon; and the ceremony was to be performed by
Mrs. ------, who, I could see, was very nervous in anticipation of the
ceremony.  Mr. ------ kept giving her instructions in a whisper, and
showing her how to throw the bottle; and as the critical moment
approached, he took hold of it along with her.  All this time we were
waiting in momentary expectation of the ship going off, everything being
ready, and only the touch of a spring, as it were, needed to make her
slide into the water.  But the chief manager kept delaying a little
longer, and a little longer; though the pilot on board sent to tell him
that it was time she was off.  "Yes, yes; but I want as much water as I
can get," answered the manager; and so he held on till, I suppose, the
tide had raised the river Dee to its very acme of height.  At last the
word was given; the ship began slowly to move; Mrs. ------ threw the
bottle against the bow with a spasmodic effort that dashed it into a
thousand pieces, and diffused the fragrance of the old port all around,
where it lingered several minutes.  I did not think that there could have
been such a breathless moment in an affair of this kind.

This is an atom: 
The ship moved majestically down toward the river; and unless it were
Niagara, I never saw anything grander and more impressive than the motion
of this mighty mass as she departed from us.  We on the platform, and
everybody along both shores of the Dee, took off our hats in the rain,
waved handkerchiefs, cheered, shouted,--"Beautiful!"  "What a noble
launch!"  "Never was so fair a sight!"--and, really, it was so grand,
that calm, majestic movement, that I felt the tears come into my eyes.
The wooden pathway adown which she was gliding began to smoke with the
friction; when all at once, when we expected to see her plunge into the
Dee, she came to a full stop.  Mr. ------, the father of my friend, a
gentleman with white hair, a dark, expressive face, bright eyes, and an
Oriental cast of features, immediately took the alarm.  A moment before
his countenance had been kindled with triumph; but now he turned pale as
death, and seemed to grow ten years older while I was looking at him.
Well he might, for his noble ship was stuck fast in the land of the Dee,
and without deepening the bed of the river, I do not see how her vast
iron hulk is ever to be got out.

This is an atom: 
[This steamer was afterwards successfully floated off on the 29th of the
same month.]

This is an atom: 
There was no help for it.  A steamboat was hitched on to the stranded
vessel, but broke two or three cables without stirring her an inch.  So,
after waiting long after we had given up all hope, we went to the office
of the ship-yard, and there took a lunch; and still the rain was pouring,
pouring, pouring, and I never experienced a blacker affair in all my
days.  Then we had to wait a great while for a train to take us back, so
that it was almost five o'clock before we arrived at Chester, where I
spent an hour in rambling about the old town, under the Rows; and on the
walls, looking down on the treetops, directly under my feet, and through
their thick branches at the canal, which creeps at the base, and at the
cathedral; walking under the dark intertwining arches of the cloisters,
and looking up at the great cathedral tower, so wasted away externally by
time and weather that it looks, save for the difference of color between
white snow and red freestone, like a structure of snow, half dissolved by
several warm days.

This is an atom: 
At the lunch I met with a graduate of Cambridge (England), tutor of a
grandson of Percival, with his pupil (Percival, the assassinated
minister, I mean).  I should not like this position of tutor to a young
Englishman; it certainly has an ugly twang of upper servitude.  I
observed that the tutor gave his pupil the best seat in the railway
carriage, and in all respects provided for his comfort before thinking of
his own; and this, not as a father does for his child, out of love, but
from a sense of place and duty, which I did not quite see how a gentleman
could consent to feel.  And yet this Mr. C------ was evidently a
gentleman, and a quiet, intelligent, agreeable, and, no doubt, learned
man.  K------ being mentioned, Mr. C------ observed that he had known him
well at college, having been his contemporary there.  He did not like
him, however,--thought him a "dangerous man," as well as I could gather;
he thinks there is some radical defect in K------'s moral nature, a lack
of sincerity; and, furthermore, he believes him to be a sensualist in his
disposition, in support of which view he said Mr. K------ had made
drawings, such as no pure man could have made, or could allow himself to
show or look at.  This was the only fact which Mr. C------ adduced,
bearing on his opinion of K------; otherwise, it seemed to be one of
those early impressions which a collegian gets of his fellow-students,
and which he never gets rid of, whatever the character of the person may
turn out to be in after years.  I have judged several persons in this
way, and still judge them so, though the world has cone to very different
conclusions.  Which is right?--the world, which has the man's whole
mature life on its side; or his early companion, who has nothing for it
but some idle passages of his youth?

This is an atom: 
Mr. M------ remarked of newspaper reporters, that they may be known at
all celebrations, and of any public occasion, by the enormous quantity of
luncheon they eat.

This is an atom: 
August 12th.--Mr. B------ dined with us at the Rock Ferry Hotel the day
before yesterday.  Speaking of Helvellyn, and the death of Charles Cough,
about whom Wordsworth and Scott have both sung, Mr. B------ mentioned a
version of that story which rather detracts from the character of the
faithful dog.

This is an atom: 
But somehow it lowers one's opinion of human nature itself, to be
compelled so to lower one's standard of a dog's nature.  I don't intend
to believe the disparaging story, but it reminds me of the story of the
New-Zealander who was asked whether he loved a missionary who had been
laboring for his soul and those of his countrymen.  "To be sure I loved
him.  Why, I ate a piece of him for my breakfast this morning!"

This is an atom: 
For the last week or two I have passed my time between the hotel and the
Consulate, and a weary life it is, and one that leaves little of profit
behind it.  I am sick to death of my office,--brutal captains and brutal
sailors; continual complaints of mutual wrong, which I have no power to
set right, and which, indeed, seem to have no right on either side; calls
of idleness or ceremony from my travelling countrymen, who seldom know
what they are in search of at the commencement of their tour, and never
have attained any desirable end at the close of it; beggars, cheats,
simpletons, unfortunates, so mixed up that it is impossible to
distinguish one from another, and so, in self-defence, the Consul
distrusts them all. . . .

This is an atom: 
At the hotel, yesterday, there was a large company of factory people from
Preston, who marched up from the pier with a band of military music
playing before them.  They spent the day in the gardens and ball-room of
the hotel, dancing and otherwise merry-making; but I saw little of them,
being at the Consulate.  Towards evening it drizzled, and the assemblage
melted away gradually; and when the band marched down to the pier, there
were few to follow, although one man went dancing before the musicians,
flinging out his arms, and footing it with great energy and
gesticulation.  Some young women along the road likewise began to
dance as the music approached.

This is an atom: 
Thackeray has a dread of servants, insomuch that he hates to address
them, or to ask them for anything.  His morbid sensibility, in this
regard, has perhaps led him to study and muse upon them, so that he may
be presumed to have a more intimate knowledge of this class than any
other man.

This is an atom: 
Carlyle dresses so badly, and wears such a rough outside, that the
flunkies are rude to him at gentlemen's doors.

This is an atom: 
In the afternoon J----- and I took a walk towards Tranmere Hall, and
beyond, as far as Oxton.  This part of the country, being so near
Liverpool and Birkenhead, is all sprinkled over with what they call
"Terraces," "Bellevues," and other pretty names for semi-detached villas
("Recluse Cottage" was one) for a somewhat higher class.  But the old,
whitewashed stone cottage is still frequent, with its roof of slate or
thatch, which perhaps is green with weeds or grass.  Through its open
door, you see that it has a pavement of flagstones, or perhaps of red
freestone; and hogs and donkeys are familiar with the threshold.  The
door always opens directly into the kitchen, without any vestibule; and,
glimpsing in, you see that a cottager's life must be the very plainest
and homeliest that ever was lived by men and women.  Yet the flowers
about the door often indicate a native capacity for the beautiful; but
often there is only a pavement of round stones or of flagstones, like
those within.  At one point where there was a little bay, as it were, in
the hedge fence, we saw something like a small tent or wigwam,--an arch
of canvas three or four feet high, and open in front, under which sat a
dark-complexioned woman and some children.  The woman was sewing, and I
took them for gypsies.

This is an atom: 
August 17th.--Yesterday afternoon J----- and I went to Birkenhead Park,
which I have already described. . . . It so happened that there was a
large school spending its holiday there; a school of girls of the lower
classes, to the number of a hundred and fifty, who disported themselves
on the green, under the direction of the schoolmistresses and of an old
gentleman.  It struck me, as it always has, to observe how the lower
orders of this country indicate their birth and station by their aspect
and features.  In America there would be a good deal of grace and beauty
among a hundred and fifty children and budding girls, belonging to
whatever rank of life.  But here they had universally a most plebeian
look,--stubbed, sturdy figures, round, coarse faces, snub-noses,--the
most evident specimens of the brown bread of human nature.  They looked
wholesome and good enough, and fit to sustain their rough share of life;
but it would have been impossible to make a lady out of any one of them.
Climate, no doubt, has most to do with diffusing a slender elegance over
American young-womanhood; but something, perhaps, is also due to the
circumstance of classes not being kept apart there as they are here: they
interfuse, amid the continual ups and downs of our social life; and so,
in the lowest stations of life, you may see the refining influence of
gentle blood.  At all events, it is only necessary to look at such an
assemblage of children as I saw yesterday, to be convinced that birth and
blood do produce certain characteristics.  To be sure, I have seen no
similar evidence in England or elsewhere of old gentility refining and
elevating the race.

This is an atom: 
These girls were all dressed in black gowns, with white aprons and
neckerchiefs, and white linen caps on their heads,--a very dowdyish
attire, and well suited to their figures.  I saw only two of their
games,--in one, they stood in a circle, while two of their number chased
one another within and without the ring of girls, which opened to let the
fugitive pass, but closed again to impede the passage of the pursuer.
The other was blind-man's-buff on a new plan: several of the girls,
sometimes as many as twenty, being blinded at once, and pursuing a single
one, who rang a hand-bell to indicate her whereabouts.  This was very
funny; the bell-girl keeping just beyond their reach, and drawing them
after her in a huddled group, so that they sometimes tumbled over one
another and lay sprawling.  I think I have read of this game in Strutt's
"English Sports and Pastimes."

This is an atom: 
We walked from the Park home to Rock Ferry, a distance of three or four
miles,--a part of which was made delightful by a foot-path, leading us
through fields where the grass had just been mown, and others where the
wheat harvest was commenced.  The path led us into the very midst of the
rural labor that was going forward; and the laborers rested a moment to
look at us; in fact, they seemed to be more willing to rest than American
laborers would have been.  Children were loitering along this path or
sitting down beside it; and we met one little maid, passing from village
to village, intent on some errand.  Reaching Tranmere, I went into an
alehouse, nearly opposite the Hall, and called for a glass of ale.  The
doorstep before the house, and the flagstone floor of the entry and
tap-room, were chalked all over in corkscrew lines,--an adornment that
gave an impression of care and neatness, the chalked lines being
evidently freshly made.  It was a low, old-fashioned room ornamented with
a couple of sea-shells, and an earthen-ware figure on the mantel-piece;
also with advertisements of Allsop's ale, and other drinks, and with a
pasteboard handbill of "The Ancient Order of Foresters"; any member of
which, paying sixpence weekly, is entitled to ten shillings per week, and
the attendance of a first-rate physician in sickness, and twelve pounds
to be paid to his friends in case of death.  Any member of this order,
when travelling, is sure (says the handbill) to meet with a brother
member to lend him a helping hand, there being nearly three thousand
districts of this order, and more than a hundred and nine thousand
members in Great Britain, whence it has extended to Australia, America,
and other countries.

This is an atom: 
Looking up at the gateway of Tranmere Hall, I discovered an inscription
on the red freestone lintel, and, though much time-worn, I succeeded in
reading it.  "Labor omnia vincit. 1614."  There were likewise some
initials which I could not satisfactorily make out.  The sense of this
motto would rather befit the present agricultural occupants of the house
than the idle gentlefolks who built and formerly inhabited it.

This is an atom: 
SMITHELL'S HALL.

This is an atom: 
August 25th.--On Thursday I went by invitation to Smithell's Hall in
Bolton le Moors to dine and spend the night.  The Hall is two or three
miles from the town of Bolton, where I arrived by railway from Liverpool,
and which seems to be a pretty large town, though the houses are
generally modern, or with modernized fronts of brick or stucco.  It is a
manufacturing town, and the tall brick chimneys rise numerously in the
neighborhood, and are so near Smithell's Hall that I suspect the
atmosphere is somewhat impregnated with their breath.  Mr. ------ can
comfort himself with the rent which he receives from the factories
erected upon his own grounds; and I suppose the value of his estate has
greatly increased by the growth of manufactories; although, unless he
wish to sell it, I do not see what good this can do him.

This is an atom: 
Smithell's Hall is one of the oldest residences of England, and still
retains very much the aspect that it must have had several centuries ago.
The house formerly stood around all four sides of a quadrangle, enclosing
a court, and with an entrance through an archway.  One side of this
quadrangle was removed in the time of the present Mr. ------'s father,
and the front is now formed by the remaining three sides.  They look
exceedingly ancient and venerable, with their range of gables and lesser
peaks.  The house is probably timber-framed throughout, and is overlaid
with plaster, and its generally light line is painted with a row of
trefoils in black, producing a very quaint effect.  The wing, forming one
side of the quadrangle, is a chapel, and has been so from time
immemorial; and Mr. ------ told me that he had a clergyman, and even a
bishop, in his own diocese.  The drawing-room is on the opposite side of
the quadrangle; and through an arched door, in the central portion, there
is a passage to the rear of the house.  It is impossible to describe such
an old rambling edifice as this, or to get any clear idea of its plan,
even by going over it, without the aid of a map.  Mr. ------ has added
some portions, and altered others, but with due regard to harmony with
the original structure, and the great body of it is still mediaeval.

This is an atom: 
The entrance-hall opens right upon the quadrangular court; and is a
large, low room, with a settle of carved old oak, and other old oaken
furniture,--a centre-table with periodicals and newspapers on it,--some
family pictures on the walls,--and a large, bright coal-fire in the
spacious grate.  The fire is always kept up, throughout summer and
winter, and it seemed to me an excellent plan, and rich with cheerful
effects; insuring one comfortable place, and that the most central in the
house, whatever may be the inclemency of the weather.  It was a cloudy,
moist, showery day, when I arrived; and this fire gave me the brightest
and most hospitable smile, and took away any shivery feeling by its mere
presence.  The servant showed me thence into a low-studded dining-room,
where soon Mrs. ------ made her appearance, and, after some talk, brought
me into the billiard-room, opening from the hall, where Mr. ------ and a
young gentleman were playing billiards, and two ladies looking on.  After
the game was finished, Mr. ------ took me round to see the house and
grounds.

This is an atom: 
The peculiarity of this house is what is called "The Bloody Footstep."
In the time of Bloody Mary, a Protestant clergyman--George Marsh by name
--was examined before the then proprietor of the Hall, Sir Roger Barton,
I think, and committed to prison for his heretical opinions, and was
ultimately burned at the stake.  As his guards were conducting him from
the justice-room, through the stone-paved passage that leads from front
to rear of Smithell's Hall, he stamped his foot upon one of the
flagstones in earnest protestation against the wrong which he was
undergoing.  The foot, as some say, left a bloody mark in the stone;
others have it, that the stone yielded like wax under his foot, and that
there has been a shallow cavity ever since.  This miraculous footprint is
still extant; and Mrs. ------ showed it to me before her husband took me
round the estate.  It is almost at the threshold of the door opening from
the rear of the house, a stone two or three feet square, set among
similar ones, that seem to have been worn by the tread of many
generations.  The footprint is a dark brown stain in the smooth gray
surface of the flagstone; and, looking sidelong at it, there is a shallow
cavity perceptible, which Mrs. ------ accounted for as having been worn
by people setting their feet just on this place, so as to tread the very
spot, where the martyr wrought the miracle.  The mark is longer than any
mortal foot, as if caused by sliding along the stone, rather than sinking
into it; and it might be supposed to have been made by a pointed shoe,
being blunt at the heel, and decreasing towards the toe.  The
blood-stained version of the story is more consistent with the appearance
of the mark than the imprint would be; for if the martyr's blood oozed
out through his shoe and stocking, it might have made his foot slide
along the stone, and thus have lengthened the shape.  Of course it is all
a humbug,--a darker vein cropping up through the gray flagstone; but, it
is probably a fact, and, for aught I know, may be found in Fox's Book of
Martyrs, that George Marsh underwent an examination in this house [There
is a full and pathetic account of the examination and martyrdom of George
Marsh in the eleventh section of Fox's Book of Martyrs, as I have just
found (June 9, 1867).  He went to Smithell's hall, among other places, to
be questioned by Mr. Barton.--ED.]; and the tradition may have connected
itself with the stone within a short time after the martyrdom; or,
perhaps, when the old persecuting knight departed this life, and Bloody
Mary was also dead, people who had stood at a little distance from the
Hall door, and had seen George Marsh lift his hand and stamp his foot
just at this spot,--perhaps they remembered this action and gesture, and
really believed that Providence had thus made an indelible record of it
on the stone; although the very stone and the very mark might have lain
there at the threshold hundreds of years before.  But, even if it had
been always there, the footprint might, after the fact, be looked upon as
a prophecy, from the time when the foundation of the old house was laid,
that a holy and persecuted man should one day set his foot here, on the
way that was to lead him to the stake.  At any rate, the legend is a good
one.

This is an atom: 
Mrs. ------ tells me that the miraculous stone was once taken up from the
pavement, and flung out of doors, where it remained many years; and in
proof of this, it is cracked quite across at one end.  This is a pity,
and rather interferes with the authenticity, if not of the stone itself,
yet of its position in the pavement.  It is not far from the foot of the
staircase, leading up to Sir Roger Barton's examination-room, whither we
ascended, after examining the footprint.  This room now opens sideways on
the Chapel, into which it looks down, and which is spacious enough to
accommodate a pretty large congregation.  On one of the walls of the
Chapel there is a marble tablet to the memory of one of the present
family,--Mr.------'s father, I suppose; he being the first of the name
who possessed the estate.  The present owners, however, seem to feel
pretty much the same pride in the antiquity and legends of the house as
if it had come down to them in an unbroken succession of their own
forefathers.  It has, in reality, passed several times from one family to
another, since the Conquest.

This is an atom: 
Mr. ------ led me through a spacious old room, which was formerly
panelled with carved oak, but which is converted into a brew-house, up a
pair of stairs, into the garret of one of the gables, in order to show me
the ancient framework of the house.  It is of oak, and preposterously
ponderous,--immense beams and rafters, which no modern walls could
support,--a gigantic old skeleton, which architects say must have stood a
thousand years; and, indeed, it is impossible to ascertain the date of
the original foundation, though it is known to have been repaired and
restored between five and six centuries ago.  Of course, in the lapse of
ages, it must continually have been undergoing minor changes, but without
at all losing its identity.  Mr. ------ says that this old oak wood,
though it looks as strong and as solid as ever, has really lost its
strength, and that it would snap short off, on application of any force.

This is an atom: 
After this we took our walk through the grounds, which are well wooded,
though the trees will bear no comparison with those which I have seen in
the midland parts of England.  It takes, I suspect, a much longer time
for trees to attain a good size here than in America; and these trees, I
think Mr. ------ told me, were principally set out by himself.  He is
upwards of sixty,--a good specimen of the old English country-gentleman,
sensible, loving his land and his trees and his dogs and his game, doing
a little justice-business, and showing a fitness for his position; so
that you feel satisfied to have him keep it.  He was formerly a member of
Parliament.  I had met him before at dinner at Mrs. H------'s. . . . He
took pleasure in showing me his grounds, through which he has laid out a
walk, winding up and down through dells and over hillocks, and now and
then crossing a rustic bridge; so that you have an idea of quite an
extensive domain.

This is an atom: 
Beneath the trees there is a thick growth of ferns, serving as cover for
the game.  A little terrier-dog, who had hitherto kept us company, all at
once disappeared; and soon afterwards we heard the squeak of some poor
victim in the cover, whereupon Mr. ------ set out with agility, and ran
to the rescue.--By and by the terrier came back with a very guilty look.
From the wood we passed into the open park, whence we had a distant view
of the house; and, returning thither, we viewed it in other aspects, and
on all sides.  One portion of it is occupied by Mr. ------'s gardener,
and seems not to have been repaired, at least as to its exterior, for a
great many years,--showing the old wooden frame, painted black, with
plaster in the interstices; and broad windows, extending across the whole
breadth of the rooms, with hundreds of little diamond-shaped panes of
glass.  Before dinner I was shown to my room, which opens from an ancient
gallery, lined with oak, and lighted by a row of windows along one side
of the quadrangle.  Along this gallery are the doors of several
sleeping-chambers, one of which--I think it is here--is called "The Dead
Man's Chamber."  It is supposed to have been the room where the corpses
of persons connected with the household used to be laid out.  My own room
was called "The Beam Chamber," from am immense cross-beam that projects
from the ceiling, and seems to be an entire tree, laid across, and left
rough-hewn, though at present it is whitewashed.  The but of the tree
(for it diminishes from one end of the chamber to the other) is nearly
two feet square, in its visible part.

This is an atom: 
We dined, at seven o'clock, in a room some thirty-five or forty feet
long, and proportionably broad, all panelled with the old carved oak
which Mr. ------ took from the room which he had converted into a
brew-house.  The oak is now of a very dark brown hue, and, being highly
polished, it produces a sombre but rich effect.  It is supposed to be of
the era of Henry the Seventh, and when I examined it the next morning, I
found it very delicately and curiously wrought.  There are carved
profiles of persons in the costume of the times, done with great skill;
also foliage, intricate puzzles of intersecting lines, sacred devices,
anagrams, and, among others, the device of a bar across a tun, indicating
the name of Barton.  Most of the carving, however, is less elaborate and
intricate than these specimens, being in a perpendicular style, and on
one pattern.  Before the wood grew so very dark, the beauty of the work
must have been much more easily seen than now, as to particulars, though
I hardly think that the general effect could have been better; at least,
the sombre richness that overspreads the entire square of the room is
suitable to such an antique house.  An elaborate Gothic cornice runs
round the whole apartment.  The sideboard and other furniture are of
Gothic patterns, and, very likely, of genuine antiquity; but the
fireplace is perhaps rather out of keeping, being of white marble with
the arms of this family sculptured on it.

This is an atom: 
Though hardly sunset when we sat down to dinner, yet, it being an
overcast day, and the oaken room so sombre, we had candles burning on
the table; and, long before dinner was over, the candle-light was all the
light we had.  It is always pleasanter to dine by artificial light.
Mrs. ------'s dinner was a good one, and Mr. ------'s wines were very
good.  I had Mrs. ------ on one side, and another lady on the other
side. . . .

This is an atom: 
After dinner there were two card-parties formed in the dining-room, at
one of which there was a game of Vingt-et-un, and at the other a game of
whist, at which Mrs. ------ and I lost several shillings to a Mrs. Halton
and Mr. Gaskell. . . . After finishing our games at cards, Mrs. Halton
drove off in a pony-chaise to her own house; the other ladies retired,
and the gentlemen sat down to chat awhile over the hall fire,
occasionally sipping a glass of wine-and-water, and finally we all went
off to our rooms.  It was past twelve o'clock when I composed myself to
sleep, and I could not have slept long, when a tremendous clap of thunder
woke me just in time to see a vivid flash of lightning.  I saw no ghosts,
though Mrs. ------ tells me there is one, which makes a disturbance,
unless religious services are regularly kept up in the Chapel.

This is an atom: 
In the morning, before breakfast, we had prayers, read by Mr. ------, in
the oak dining-room, all the servants coming in, and everybody kneeling
down.  I should like to know how much true religious feeling is indicated
by this regular observance of religious rites in English families.  In
America, if people kneel down to pray, it is pretty certain that they
feel a genuine interest in the matter, and their daily life is supposed
to be in accordance with their devotions.  If an American is an infidel,
he knows it; but an Englishman is often so without suspecting it,--being
kept from that knowledge by this formality of family prayer, and his
other regularities of external worship. . . .

This is an atom: 
There was a parrot in a corner of the dining-room, and, when prayers were
over, Mrs. ------ praised it very highly for having been so silent; it
being Poll's habit, probably, to break in upon the sacred exercises with
unseemly interjections and remarks.  While we were at breakfast, Poll
began to whistle and talk very vociferously, and in a tone and with
expressions that surprised me, till I learned that the bird is usually
kept in the kitchen and servants' hall, and is only brought into the
dining-room at prayer-time and breakfast.  Thus its mouth is full of
kitchen talk, which flows out before the gentlefolks with the queerest
effect.

This is an atom: 
After breakfast I examined the carvings of the room.  Mr. ------ has
added to its decorations the coats of arms of all the successive
possessors of the house, with those of the families into which they
married, including the Ratcliffes, Stanleys, and others.  From the
dining-room I passed into the library, which contains books enough to
make a rainy day pass pleasantly.  I remember nothing else that I need to
record; and as I sat by the hall fire, talking with Mr. Gaskell, at about
eleven o'clock, the butler brought me word that a fly, which I had
bespoken, was ready to convey me to the railway.  I took leave of
Mrs. ------, her last request being that I would write a ghost-story
for her house,--and drove off.

This is an atom: 
SHREWSBURY

This is an atom: 
September 5th.--Yesterday we all of us set forth from Rock Ferry at half
past twelve, and reached Shrewsbury between three and four o'clock, and
took up our quarters at the Lion Hotel.  We found Shrewsbury situated on
an eminence, around which the Severn winds, making a peninsula of it,
quite densely covered by the town.  The streets ascend, and curve about,
and intersect each other with the customary irregularity of these old
English towns, so that it is quite impossible to go directly to any given
point, or for a stranger to find his way to a place which he wishes to
reach, though, by what seems a singular good fortune, the sought-for
place is always offering itself when least expected.  On this account I
never knew such pleasant walking as in old streets like those of
Shrewsbury.  And there are passages opening under archways, and winding
up between high edifices, very tempting to the explorer, and generally
leading to some court, or some queer old range of buildings or piece of
architecture, which it would be the greatest pity to miss seeing.  There
was a delightful want of plan in the laying out of these ancient towns.
In fact, they never were laid out at all, nor were restrained by any plan
whatever, but grew naturally, with streets as eccentric as the pathway of
a young child toddling about the floor.

This is an atom: 
The first curious thing we particularly noticed, when we strolled out
after dinner, was the old market-house, which stands in the midst of an
oblong square; a gray edifice, elevated on pillars and arches, and with
the statue of an armed knight, Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, in a
central niche, in its front.  The statue is older than the market-house,
having been moved thither from one of the demolished towers of the city
wall in 1795.  The market-house was erected in 1595.  There are other
curious sculptures and carvings and quirks of architecture about this
building; and the houses that stand about the square are, many of them,
very striking specimens of what dwelling-houses used to be in Elizabeth's
time, and earlier.  I have seen no such stately houses, in that style, as
we found here in Shrewsbury.  There were no such fine ones in Coventry,
Stratford, Warwick, Chester, nor anywhere else where we have been.  Their
stately height and spaciousness seem to have been owing to the fact that
Shrewsbury was a sort of metropolis of the country round about, and
therefore the neighboring gentry had their town-houses there, when London
was several days' journey off, instead of a very few hours; and, besides,
it was once much the resort of kings, and the centre-point of great
schemes of war and policy.  One such house, formerly belonging to a now
extinct family, that of Ireland, rises to the height of four stories, and
has a front consisting of what look like four projecting towers.  There
are ranges of embowered windows, one above another, to the full height of
the house, and these are surmounted by peaked gables.  The people of
those times certainly did not deny themselves light; and while
window-glass was an article of no very remote introduction, it was
probably a point of magnificence and wealthy display to have enough of
it.  One whole side of the room must often have been formed by the
window.  This Ireland mansion, as well as all the rest of the old houses
in Shrewsbury, is a timber house,--that is, a skeleton of oak, filled up
with brick, plaster, or other material, and with the beams of the timber
marked out with black paint; besides which, in houses of any pretension,
there are generally trefoils, and other Gothic-looking ornaments,
likewise painted black.  They have an indescribable charm for me,--the
more, I think, because they are wooden; but, indeed, I cannot tell why it
is that I like them so well, and am never tired of looking at them.  A
street was a development of human life, in the days when these houses
were built, whereas a modern street is but the cold plan of an architect,
without individuality or character, and without the human emotion which a
man kneads into the walls which he builds on a scheme of his own.

This is an atom: 
We strolled to a pleasant walk under a range of trees, along the shore of
the Severn.  It is called the Quarry Walk.  The Severn is a pretty river,
the largest, I think (unless it be such an estuary as the Mersey), that I
have met with in England; that is to say, about a fair stone's-throw
across.  It is very gentle in its course, and winds along between grassy
and sedgy banks, with a good growth of weeds in some part of its current.
It has one stately bridge, called the English Bridge, of several arches,
and, as we sauntered along the Quarry Walk, we saw a ferry where the boat
seemed to be navigated across by means of a rope, stretched from bank to
bank of the river.  After leaving the Quarry Walk, we passed an old tower
of red freestone, the only one remaining of those formerly standing at
intervals along the whole course of the town wall; and we also went along
what little is now left of the wall itself.  And thence, through the
irregular streets, which gave no account of themselves, we found our way,
I know not how, back to our hotel.  It is an uncheerful old hotel, which
takes upon itself to be in the best class of English country hotels, and
charges the best price; very dark in the lower apartments, pervaded with
a musty odor, but provided with a white-neckclothed waiter, who spares no
ceremony in serving the joints of mutton.

This is an atom: 
J----- and I afterwards walked forth again, and went this time to the
castle, which stands exactly above the railway station.  A path, from its
breadth quite a street, leads up to the arched gateway; but we found a
board, giving notice that these are private grounds, and no strangers
admitted; so that we only passed through the gate a few steps, and looked
about us, and retired, on perceiving a man approaching us through the
trees and shrubbery.  A private individual, it seems, has burrowed in
this old warlike den, and turned the keep, and any other available
apartment, into a modern dwelling, and laid out his pleasure-grounds
within the precincts of the castle wall, which allows verge enough for
the purpose.  The ruins have been considerably repaired.  This castle was
built at various times, the keep by Edward I., and other portions at an
earlier period, and it stands on the isthmus left by the Severn in its
wandering course about the town.  The Duke of Cleveland now owns it.  I
do not know who occupies it.

This is an atom: 
In the course of this walk, we passed St. Mary's Church,--a very old
church indeed, no matter how old, but say, eight hundred or a thousand
years.  It has a very tall spire, and the spire is now undergoing
repairs; and, seeing the door open, I went into the porch, but found no
admission further.  Then, walking around it, through the churchyard, we
saw that all the venerable Gothic windows--one of them grand in size--
were set with stained glass, representing coats of arms and ancient
armor, and kingly robes, and saints with glories about their heads, and
Scriptural people; but all of these, as far as our actual perception was
concerned, quite colorless, and with only a cold outline, dimly filled
up.  Yet, had we been within the church, and had the sunlight been
streaming through, what a warm, rich, gorgeous, roseate, golden life
would these figures have showed!

This is an atom: 
In the churchyard, close upon the street, so that its dust must be
continually scattered over the spot, I saw a heavy gray tombstone, with a
Latin inscription, purporting that Bishop Butler, the author of the
Analogy, in his lifetime had chosen this as a burial-place for himself
and his family.  There is a statue of him within the church.  From the
top of the spire a man, above a hundred years ago, attempted to descend,
by means of a rope, to the other side of the Severn; but the rope broke,
and he fell in his midway flight, and was killed.  It was an undertaking
worthy of Sam Patch.  There is a record of the fact on the outside of the
tower.

This is an atom: 
I remember nothing more that we saw yesterday; but, before breakfast,
J----- and I sallied forth again, and inspected the gateway and interior
court of the Council House,--a very interesting place, both in itself and
for the circumstances connected with it, it having been the place where
the councillors for the Welsh marches used to reside during their annual
meetings; and Charles the First also lived here for six weeks in 1612.
James II. likewise held his court here in 1687.  The house was originally
built in 1501,--that is, the Council House itself,--the gateway, and the
house through which it passes, being of as late date as 1620.  This
latter is a fine old house, in the usual style of timber architecture,
with the timber lines marked out, and quaint adornments in black paint;
and the pillars of the gateway which passes beneath the front chamber are
of curiously carved oak, which has probably stood the action of English
atmosphere better than marble would have done.  Passing through this
gateway, we entered a court, and saw some old buildings more or less
modernized, but without destroying their aged stateliness, standing round
three sides of it, with arched entrances and bow-windows, and windows in
the roofs, and peaked gables, and all the delightful irregularity and
variety that these houses have, and which make them always so fresh,--and
with so much detail that every minute you see something heretofore
unseen.  It must have been no unfit residence for a king and his court,
when those three sides of the square, all composing one great fantastic
house, were in their splendor.  The square itself, too, must have been a
busy and cheerful scene, thronged with attendants, guests, horses, etc.

This is an atom: 
After breakfast, we all walked out, and, crossing the English Bridge,
looked at the Severn over its parapet.  The river is here broader than
elsewhere, and very shallow, and has an island covered with bushes, about
midway across.  Just over the bridge we saw a church, of red freestone,
and evidently very ancient.  This is the Church of the Holy Cross, and is
a portion of the Abbey of St. Peter and St. John, which formerly covered
ten acres of ground.  We did not have time to go into the church; but the
windows and other points of architecture, so far as we could discern
them, and knew how to admire them, were exceedingly venerable and
beautiful.  On the other side of the street, over a wide space, there are
other remains of the old abbey; and the most interesting was a stone
pulpit, now standing in the open air, seemingly in a garden, but which
originally stood in the refectory of the abbey, and was the station
whence one of the monks read to his brethren at their meals.  The pulpit
is much overgrown with ivy.  We should have made further researches among
these remains, though they seem now to be in private grounds; but a large
mastiff came nut of his kennel, and, approaching us to the length of his
iron chain, began barking very fiercely.  Nor had we time to see half
that we would gladly have seen and studied here and elsewhere about
Shrewsbury.  It would have been very interesting to have visited
Hotspur's and Falstaff's battle-field, which is four miles from the town;
too distant, certainly, for Falstaff to have measured the length of the
fight by Shrewsbury clock.  There is now a church, built there by Henry
IV., and said to cover the bones of those slain in the battle.

This is an atom: 
Returning into the town, we penetrated some narrow lanes, where, as the
old story goes, people might almost shake hands across from the top
windows of the opposite houses, impending towards each other.  Emerging
into a wider street, at a spot somewhat more elevated than other parts of
the town, we went into a shop to buy some Royal Shrewsbury cakes, which
we had seen advertised at several shop windows.  They are a very rich
cake, with plenty of eggs, sugar, and butter, and very little flour.

This is an atom: 
A small public building of stone, of modern date, was close by; and
asking the shopwoman what it was, she said it was the Butter Cross, or
market for butter, eggs, and poultry.  It is a remarkable site, for here,
in ancient times, stood a stone cross, where heralds used to make
proclamation, and where criminals of state used to be executed.  David,
the last of the Welsh princes, was here cruelly put to death by Edward
I., and many noblemen were beheaded on this spot, after being taken
prisoners in the battle of Shrewsbury.

This is an atom: 
I can only notice one other memorable place in Shrewsbury, and that is
the Raven Inn, where Farquhar wrote his comedy of "The Recruiting
Officer" in 1701.  The window of the room in which he wrote is said to
look into the inn yard, and I went through the arched entrance to see if
I could distinguish it.  The hostlers were currying horses in the yard,
and so stared at me that I gave but the merest glance.  The Shrewsbury
inns have not only the customary names of English inns,--as the Lion, the
Stag,--but they have also the carved wooden figures of the object named,
whereas, in all other towns, the name alone remains.

This is an atom: 
We left Shrewsbury at half past ten, and arrived in London at about four
in the afternoon.

This is an atom: 
LONDON.

This is an atom: 
September 7th.--On Wednesday, just before dusk, J----- and I walked
forth, for the first time, in London.  Our lodgings are in George Street,
Hanover Square, No. 21; and St. George's Church, where so many marriages
in romance and in fashionable life have been celebrated, is a short
distance below our house, in the same street.  The edifice seems to be of
white marble, now much blackened with London smoke, and has a Grecian
pillared portico.  In the square, just above us, is a statue of William
Pitt.  We went down Bond Street, and part of Regent Street, just
estraying a little way from our temporary nest, and taking good account
of landmarks and corners, so as to find our way readily back again.  It
is long since I have had such a childish feeling; but all that I had
heard and felt about the vastness of London made it seem like swimming in
a boundless ocean, to venture one step beyond the only spot I knew.  My
first actual impression of London was of stately and spacious streets,
and by no means so dusky and grimy as I had expected,--not merely in the
streets about this quarter of the town, which is the aristocratic
quarter, but in all the streets through which we had passed from the
railway station.  If I had not first been so imbued with the smoke and
dinginess of Liverpool, I should doubtless have seen a stronger contrast
betwixt dusky London and the cheerful glare of our American cities.
There are no red bricks here; all are of a dark hue, and whatever of
stone or stucco has been white soon clothes itself in mourning.

This is an atom: 
Yesterday forenoon I went out alone, and plunged headlong into London,
and wandered about all day, without any particular object in view, but
only to lose myself for the sake of finding myself unexpectedly among
things that I had always read and dreamed about.  The plan was perfectly
successful, for, besides vague and unprofitable wanderings, I saw, in the
course of the day, Hyde Park, Regent's Park, Whitehall, the two new
Houses of Parliament, Charing Cross, St. Paul's, the, Strand, Fleet
Street, Cheapside, Whitechapel, Leadenhall Street, the Haymarket, and a
great many other places, the names of which were classic in my memory.  I
think what interests me most here, is the London of the writers of Queen
Anne's age,--whatever Pope, The Spectator, De Foe, and down as late as
Johnson and Goldsmith, have mentioned.  The Monument, for instance, which
is of no great height nor beauty compared with that on Bunker Hill,
charmed me prodigiously.  St. Paul's appeared to me unspeakably grand and
noble, and the more so from the throng and bustle continually going on
around its base, without in the least disturbing the sublime repose of
its great dome, and, indeed, of all its massive height and breadth.
Other edifices may crowd close to its foundation, and people may tramp as
they like about it; but still the great cathedral is as quiet and serene
as if it stood in the middle of Salisbury Plain.  There cannot be
anything else in its way so good in the world as just this effect of St.
Paul's in the very heart and densest tumult of London.  I do not know
whether the church is built of marble, or of whatever other white or
nearly white material; but in the time that it has been standing there,
it has grown black with the smoke of ages, through which there are
nevertheless gleams of white, that make a most picturesque impression on
the whole.  It is much better than staring white; the edifice would not
be nearly so grand without this drapery of black.

This is an atom: 
I did not find these streets of the old city so narrow and irregular as I
expected.  All the principal ones are sufficiently broad, and there are
few houses that look antique, being, I suppose, generally modern-fronted,
when not actually of modern substance.  There is little or no show or
pretension in this part of London; it has a plain, business air,--an air
of homely, actual life, as of a metropolis of tradesmen, who have been
carrying on their traffic here, in sober earnest, for hundreds of years.
You observe on the sign-boards, "Established ninety years in Threadneedle
Street," "Established in 1109,"--denoting long pedigrees of silk-mercers
and hosiers,--De Foe's contemporaries still represented by their
posterity, who handle the hereditary yardstick on the same spot.

This is an atom: 
I must not forget to say that I crossed the Thames over a bridge which, I
think, is near Charing Cross.  Afterwards, I found my way to London
Bridge, where there was a delightful density of throng.  The Thames is
not so wide and majestic as I had imagined,--nothing like the Mersey, for
example.  As a picturesque object, however, flowing through the midst of
a city, it would lose by any increase of width.

This is an atom: 
Omnibuses are a most important aid to wanderers about London.  I reached
home, well wearied, about six o'clock.  In the course of the day, I had
seen one person whom I knew,--Mr. Clarke, to whom Henry B------
introduced me, when we went to see the great ship launched on the Dee.
This, I believe, was in Regent Street.  In that street, too, I saw a
company of dragoons, beautifully mounted, and defensively armed, in brass
helmets and steel cuirasses, polished to the utmost excess of splendor.
It was a pretty sight.  At one of the public edifices, on each side of
the portal, sat a mounted trooper similarly armed, and with his carbine
resting on his knee, just as motionless as a statue.  This, too, as a
picturesque circumstance, was very good, and really made an impression on
me with respect to the power and stability of the government, though I
could not help smiling at myself for it.  But then the thought, that for
generations an armed warrior has always sat just there, on his war-steed,
and with his weapon in his hand, is pleasant to the imagination,--
although it is questionable whether his carbine be loaded; and, no doubt,
if the authorities had any message to send, they would choose some other
messenger than this heavy dragoon,--the electric wire, for instance.
Still, if he and his horse were to be withdrawn from their post, night or
day (for I suppose the sentinels are on duty all night), it seems as if
the monarchy would be subverted, and the English constitution crumble
into rubbish; and, in honest fact, it will signify something like that,
when guard is relieved there for the last time.

This is an atom: 
September 8th.--Yesterday forenoon S-----, the two eldest children, and I
went forth into London streets, and proceeded down Regent Street, and
thence to St. James's Park, at the entrance of which is a statue of
somebody,--I forget whom.  On the very spacious gravel-walks, covering
several acres, in the rear of the Horse Guards, some soldiers were going
through their exercise; and, after looking at them awhile, we strolled
through the Park, alongside of a sheet of water, in which various kinds
of ducks, geese, and rare species of waterfowl were swimming.  There was
one swan of immense size, which moved about among the lesser fowls like a
stately, full-rigged ship among gunboats.  By and by we found ourselves
near what we since have discovered to be Buckingham Palace,--a long
building, in the Italian style, but of no impressiveness, and which one
soon wearies of looking at.  The Queen having gone to Scotland the day
before, the palace now looked deserted, although there was a one-horse
cab, of shabby aspect, standing at the principal front, where doubtless
the carriages of princes and the nobility draw up.  There is a fountain
playing before the palace, and water-fowl love to swim under its
perpetual showers.  These ducks and geese are very tame, and swim to the
margin of the pond to be fed by visitors, looking up at you with great
intelligence.

This is an atom: 
S----- asked a man in a sober suit of livery (of whom we saw several
about the Park), whose were some of the large mansions which we saw, and
he pointed out Stafford House, the residence of the Duke of Sutherland,
--a very noble edifice, much more beautiful than the palace, though not
so large; also the house of the Earl of Ellesmere, and residences of
other noblemen.  This range of mansions, along the park, from the spot
whence we viewed them, looks very much like Beacon Street, in Boston,
bordering on the Common, allowing for a considerable enlargement of
scale in favor of the Park residences.  The Park, however, has not the
beautiful elms that overshadow Boston Common, nor such a pleasant
undulation of surface, nor the fine off-view of the country, like that
across Charles River.  I doubt whether London can show so delightful a
spot as that Common, always excepting the superiority of English lawns,
which, however, is not so evident in the London parks, there being less
care bestowed on the grass than I should have expected.

This is an atom: 
From this place we wandered into what I believe to be Hyde Park,
attracted by a gigantic figure on horseback, which loomed up in the
distance.  The effect of this enormous steed and his rider is very grand,
seen in the misty atmosphere.  I do not understand why we did not see St.
James's Palace, which is situated, I believe, at the extremity of the
same range of mansions of which Stafford House is the opposite end.  From
the entrance of Hyde Park, we seem to have gone along Piccadilly, and,
making two or three turns, and getting bewildered, I put S----- and the
children into a cab, and sent them home.  Continuing my wanderings, I
went astray among squares of large aristocratic-looking edifices, all
apparently new, with no shops among them, some yet unfinished, and the
whole seeming like a city built for a colony of gentlefolks, who might be
expected to emigrate thither in a body.  It was a dreary business to
wander there, turning corner after corner, and finding no way of getting
into a less stately and more genial region.  At last, however, I passed
in front of the Queen's Mews, where sentinels were on guard, and where a
jolly-looking man, in a splendidly laced scarlet coat and white-topped
boots, was lounging at the entrance.  He looked like the prince of grooms
or coachmen. . . .

This is an atom: 
The corner of Hyde Park was within a short distance, and I took a Hansom
at the cab-stand there, and drove to the American Despatch Agency, 26
Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, having some documents of state to be
sent by to-day's steamer.  The business of forwarding despatches to
America, and distributing them to the various legations and consulates in
Europe, must be a pretty extensive one; for Mr. Miller has a large
office, and two clerks in attendance.

This is an atom: 
From this point I went through Covent Garden Market, and got astray in
the city, so that I can give no clear account of my afternoon's
wanderings.  I passed through Holborn, however, and I think it was from
that street that I passed through an archway (which I almost invariably
do, when I see one), and found myself in a very spacious, gravelled
square, surrounded on the four sides by a continuous edifice of dark
brick, very plain, and of cold and stern aspect.  This was Gray's Inn,
all tenanted by a multitude of lawyers.  Passing thence, I saw
"Furnival's Inn" over another archway, but, being on the opposite side of
the street, I did not go thither.  In Holborn, still, I went through
another arched entrance, over which was "Staples Inn," and here likewise
seemed to be offices; but, in a court opening inwards from this, there
was a surrounding seclusion of quiet dwelling-houses, with beautiful
green shrubbery and grass-plots in the court, and a great many sunflowers
in full bloom.  The windows were open; it was a lovely summer afternoon,
and I have a sense that bees were humming in the court, though this may
have been suggested by my fancy, because the sound would have been so
well suited to the scene.  A boy was reading at one of the windows.
There was not a quieter spot in England than this, and it was very
strange to have drifted into it so suddenly out of the bustle and rumble
of Holborn; and to lose all this repose as suddenly, on passing through
the arch of the outer court.  In all the hundreds of years since London
was built, it has not been able to sweep its roaring tide over that
little island of quiet.  In Holborn I saw the most antique-looking houses
that I have yet met with in London, but none of very remarkable aspect.

This is an atom: 
I think I must have been under a spell of enchantment to-day, connecting
me with St. Paul's; for, trying to get away from it by various avenues, I
still got bewildered, and again and again saw its great dome and
pinnacles before me.  I observe that the smoke has chiefly settled on the
lower part of the edifice, leaving its loftier portions and its spires
much less begrimed.  It is very beautiful, very rich.  I did not think
that anything but Gothic architecture could so have interested me.  The
statues, the niches, the embroidery, as it were, of sculpture traced
around it, produced a delightful effect.  In front of St. Paul's there is
a statue of Queen Anne, which looks rather more majestic, I doubt not,
than that fat old dame ever did.  St. Paul's churchyard had always been a
place of immense interest in my imagination.  It is merely the not very
spacious street, running round the base of the church,--at least, this
street is included in the churchyard, together with the enclosure
immediately about the church, sowed with tombstones.  I meant to look for
the children's book-shop, but forgot it, or neglected it, from not
feeling so much interest in a thing near at hand as when it seemed
unattainable.

This is an atom: 
I watched a man tearing down the brick wall of a house that did not
appear very old; but it surprised me to see how crumbly the brick-work
was, one stroke of his pick often loosening several bricks in a row.  It
is my opinion that brick houses, after a moderate term of years, stand
more by habit and courtesy than through any adhesive force of the old
mortar.

This is an atom: 
I recommenced my wanderings; but I remember nothing else particularly
claiming to be mentioned, unless it be Paternoster Row,--a little,
narrow, darksome lane, in which, it being now dusk in that density of the
city, I could not very well see what signs were over the doors.  In this
street, or thereabouts, I got into an omnibus, and, being set down near
Regent's Circus, reached home well wearied.

This is an atom: 
September 9th.--Yesterday, having some tickets to the Zoological Gardens,
we went thither with the two eldest children.  It was a most beautiful
sunny day, the very perfection of English weather,--which is as much as
to say, the best weather in the world, except, perhaps, some few days in
an American October.  These gardens are at the end of Regent's Park,
farthest from London, and they are very extensive; though, I think, not
quite worthy of London,--not so good as one would expect them to be,--not
so fine and perfect a collection of beasts, birds, and fishes, as one
might fairly look for, when the greatest metropolis of the world sets out
to have such a collection at all.--My idea was, that here every living
thing was provided for, in the way best suited to its nature and habits,
and that the refinement of civilization had here restored a garden of
Eden, where all the animal kingdom had regained a happy home.  This is
not quite the case; though, I believe, the creatures are as comfortable
as could be expected, and there are certainly a good many strange beasts
here.  The hippopotamus is the chief treasure of the collection,--an
immense, almost misshapen, mass of flesh.  At this moment I do not
remember anything that interested me except a sick monkey,--a very large
monkey, and elderly he seemed to be.  His keeper brought him some
sweetened apple and water, and some tea; for the monkey had quite lost
his appetite, and refused all ordinary diet.  He came, however, quite
eagerly, and smelt of the tea and apple, the keeper exhorting him very
tenderly to eat.  But the poor monkey shook his head slowly, and with the
most pitiable expression, at the same time extending his hand to take the
keeper's, as if claiming his sympathy and friendship.  By and by the
keeper (who is rather a surly fellow) essayed harsher measures, and
insisted that the monkey should eat what had been brought for him, and
hereupon ensued somewhat of a struggle, and the tea was overturned upon
the straw of the bed.  Then the keeper scolded him, and, seizing him by
one arm, drew him out of his little bedroom into the larger cage, upon
which the wronged monkey began a loud, dissonant, reproachful chatter,
more expressive of a sense of injury than any words could be.

This is an atom: 
Observing the spectators in front of the cage, he seemed to appeal to
them, and addressed his chatter thitherward, and stretched out his long,
lean arm and black hand between the bars, as if claiming the grasp of any
one friend he might have in the whole world.  He was placable, however;
for when the keeper called him in a gentler tone, he hobbled towards him
with a very stiff and rusty movement, and the scene closed with their
affectionately hugging one another.  But I fear the poor monkey will die.
In a future state of being, I think it will be one of my inquiries, in
reference to the mysteries of the present state, why monkeys were made.
The Creator could not surely have meant to ridicule his own work.  It
might rather be fancied that Satan had perpetrated monkeys, with a
malicious purpose of parodying the masterpiece of creation!

This is an atom: 
The Aquarium, containing, in some of its compartments, specimens of the
animal and vegetable life of the sea, and, in others, those of the fresh
water, was richly worth inspecting; but not nearly so perfect as it might
be.  Now I think we have a right to claim, in a metropolitan
establishment of this kind, in all its departments, a degree of
perfection that shall quite outdo the unpractised thought of any man on
that particular subject.

This is an atom: 
There were a good many well-dressed people and children in the gardens,
Saturday being a fashionable day for visiting them.  One great amusement
was feeding some bears with biscuits and cakes, of which they seemed
exceedingly fond.  One of the three bears clambered to the top of a high
pole, whence he invited the spectators to hand him bits of cake on the
end of a stick, or to toss them into his mouth, which he opened widely
for that purpose.  Another, apparently an elderly bear, not having skill
nor agility for these gymnastics, sat on the ground, on his hinder end,
groaning most pitifully.  The third took what stray bits he could get,
without earning them by any antics.

This is an atom: 
At four o'clock there was some music from the band of the First
Life-Guards, a great multitude of chairs being set on the greensward in
the sunshine and shade, for the accommodation of the auditors.  Here we
had the usual exhibition of English beauty, neither superior nor
otherwise to what I have seen in other parts of England.  Before the
music was over, we walked slowly homeward, along beside Regent's Park,
which is very prettily laid out, but lacks some last touch of richness
and beauty; though, after all, I do not well see what more could be done
with grass, trees, and gravel-walks.  The children, especially J-----,
who had raced from one thing to another all day long, grew tired; so we
put them into a cab, and walked slowly through Portland Place, where are
a great many noble mansions, yet no very admirable architecture; none
that possessed, nor that ever can possess, the indefinable charm of some
of those poor old timber houses in Shrewsbury.  The art of domestic
architecture is lost.  We can rear stately and beautiful dwellings
(though we seldom do), but they do not seem proper to the life of man, in
the same way that his shell is proper to the lobster; nor, indeed, is the
mansion of the nobleman proper to him, in the same kind and degree, that
a hut is proper to a peasant.

This is an atom: 
From Portland Place we passed into Regent Street, and soon reached home.

This is an atom: 
September 10th.--Yesterday forenoon we walked out with the children,
intending for Charing Cross; but, missing our way, as usual, we went down
a rather wide and stately street, and saw before us an old brick edifice
with a pretty extensive front, over which rose a clock-tower,--the whole
dingy, and looking both gloomy and mean.  There was an arched entrance
beneath the clock-tower, at which two Guardsmen, in their bear-skin caps,
were stationed as sentinels; and from this circumstance, and our having
some guess at the locality, we concluded the old brick building to be St.
James's Palace.  Otherwise we might have taken it for a prison, or for a
hospital, which, in truth, it was at first intended for.  But, certainly,
there are many paupers in England who live in edifices of far more
architectural pretension externally than this principal palace of the
English sovereigns.

This is an atom: 
Seeing other people go through the archway, we also went, meeting no
impediment from the sentinels, and found ourselves in a large paved
court, in the centre of which a banner was stuck down, with a few
soldiers standing near it.  This flag was the banner of the regiment of
guards on duty.  The aspect of the interior court was as naked and dismal
as the outside, the brick being of that dark hue almost universal in
England.  On one side of the court there was a door which seemed to give
admission to a chapel, into which several persons went, and probably we
might have gone too, had we liked.  From this court, we penetrated into
at least two or three others; for the palace is very extensive, and all
of it, so far as I could see, on the same pattern,--large, enclosed
courts, paved, and quite bare of grass, shrubbery, or any beautiful
thing,--dark, stern, brick walls, without the slightest show of
architectural beauty, or even an ornament over the square, commonplace
windows, looking down on those forlorn courts.  A carriage-drive passes
through it, if I remember aright, from the principal front, emerging by
one of the sides; and I suppose that the carriages roll through the
palace, at the levees and drawing-rooms.  There was nothing to detain us
here any long time, so we went from court to court, and came out through
a side-opening.  The edifice is battlemented all round, and this, with
somewhat of fantastic in the shape of the clock-tower, is the only
attempt at ornament in the whole.

This is an atom: 
Then we skirted along St. James's Park, passing Marlborough House,--a red
brick building,--and a very long range of stone edifices, which, whether
they were public or private, one house or twenty, we knew not.  We
ascended the steps of the York column, and soon reached Charing Cross and
Trafalgar Square, where there are more architectural monuments than in
any other one place in London; besides two fountains, playing in large
reservoirs of water, and various edifices of note and interest.

This is an atom: 
Northumberland House, now, and for a long while, the town residence of
the Percys, stands on the Strand side,--over the entrance a lion, very
spiritedly sculptured, flinging out his long tail.  On another side of
the square is Morley's Hotel, exceedingly spacious, and looking more
American than anything else in the hotel line that I have seen here.

This is an atom: 
The Nelson monument, with Lord Nelson, in a cocked hat, on its top, is
very grand in its effect.  All about the square there were sundry
loungers, people looking at the bas-reliefs on Nelson's Column, children
paddling in the reservoirs of the fountains; and, it being a sunny day,
it was a cheerful and lightsome, as well as an impressive scene.  On
second thoughts, I do not know but that London should have a far better
display of architecture and sculpture than this, on its finest site, and
in its very centre; for, after all, there is nothing of the very best.
But I missed nothing at the time.

This is an atom: 
In the afternoon S----- and I set out to attend divine service in
Westminster Abbey.  On our way thither we passed through Pall Mall, which
is full of club-houses, and we were much struck with the beauty of the
one lately erected for the Carleton Club.  It is built of a buff-colored
or yellowish stone, with pillars or pilasters of polished Aberdeen
granite, wonderfully rich and beautiful; and there is a running border of
sculptured figures all round the upper part of the building, besides
other ornament and embroidery, wherever there was room or occasion for
it.  It being an oblong square, the smooth and polished aspect in this
union of two rich colors in it,--this delicacy and minuteness of finish,
this lavish ornament--made me think of a lady's jewel-box; and if it
could be reduced to the size of about a foot square, or less, it would
make the very prettiest one that ever was seen.  I question whether it
have any right to be larger than a jewel-box; but it is certainly a most
beautiful edifice.  We turned down Whitehall, at the head of which, over
the very spot where the Regicides were executed, stands the bronze
equestrian statue of Charles I.,--the statue that was buried under the
earth during the whole of Cromwell's time, and emerged after the
Restoration.  We saw the Admiralty and the Horse-Guards, and, in front of
the latter, the two mounted sentinels, one of whom was flirting and
laughing with some girls.  On the other side of the street stands the
Banqueting-House, built by Inigo Jones; from a window of which King
Charles stepped forth, wearing a kingly head, which, within a few minutes
afterwards, fell with a dead thump on the scaffold.  It was nobly done,--
and nobly suffered.  How rich is history in the little space around this
spot!

This is an atom: 
I find that the day after I reached London, I entirely passed by
Westminster Abbey without knowing it, partly because my eyes were
attracted by the gaudier show of the new Houses of Parliament, and partly
because this part of the Abbey has been so much repaired and renewed that
it has not the marks of age.  Looking at its front, I now found it very
grand and venerable; but it is useless to attempt a description: these
things are not to be translated into words; they can be known only by
seeing them, and, until seen, it is well to shape out no idea of them.
Impressions, states of mind, produced by noble spectacles of whatever
kind, are all that it seems worth while to attempt reproducing with the
pen.

This is an atom: 
After coming out of the Abbey, we looked at the two Houses of Parliament,
directly across the way,--an immense structure, and certainly most
splendid, built of a beautiful warm-colored stone.  The building has a
very elaborate finish, and delighted me at first; but by and by I began
to be sensible of a weariness in the effect, a lack of variety in the
plan and ornament, a deficiency of invention; so that instead of being
more and more interested the longer one looks, as is the case with an old
Gothic edifice, and continually reading deeper into it, one finds that
one has seen all in seeing a little piece, and that the magnificent
palace has nothing better to show one or to do for one.  It is wonderful
how the old weather-stained and smoke-blackened Abbey shames down this
brand-newness; not that the Parliament houses are not fine objects to
look at, too.

This is an atom: 
Yesterday morning we walked to Charing Cross, with U---- and J-----, and
there took a cab to the Tower, driving thither through the Strand, Fleet
Street, past St. Paul's, and amid all the thickest throng of the city.  I
have not a very distinct idea of the Tower, but remember that our cab
drove within an outer gate, where we alighted at a ticket-office; the old
royal fortress being now a regular show-place, at sixpence a head,
including the sight of armory and crown-jewels.  We saw about the gate
several warders or yeomen of the guard, or beefeaters, dressed in scarlet
coats of antique fashion, richly embroidered with golden crowns, both on
the breast and back, and other royal devices and insignia; so that they
looked very much like the kings on a pack of cards, or regular trumps, at
all events.  I believe they are old soldiers, promoted to this position
for good conduct.  One of them took charge of us, and when a sufficient
number of visitors had collected with us, he led us to see what very
small portion of the Tower is shown.

This is an atom: 
There is a great deal of ground within the outer precincts; and it has
streets and houses and inhabitants and a church within it; and, going up
and down behind the warder, without any freedom to get acquainted with
the place by strolling about, I know little more about it than when I
went in,--only recollecting a mean and disagreeable confusion of brick
walls, barracks, paved courts, with here and there a low bulky turret, of
rather antique aspect, and, in front of one of the edifices, a range of
curious old cannon, lying on the ground, some of them immensely large and
long, and beautifully wrought in brass.  I observed by a plan, however,
that the White Tower, containing the armory, stands about in the centre
of the fortress, and that it is a square, battlemented structure, having
a turret at each angle.  We followed the warder into the White Tower, and
there saw, in the first place, a long gallery of mounted knights, and men
at arms, which has been so often described that when I wish to recall it
to memory I shall turn to some other person's account of it.  I was much
struck, however, with the beautiful execution of a good many of the suits
of armor, and the exquisite detail with which they were engraved.  The
artists of those days attained very great skill, in this kind of
manufacture.  The figures of the knights, too, in full array, undoubtedly
may have shown a combination of stateliness and grace which heretofore I
have not believed in,--not seeing how it could be compatible with iron
garments.  But it is quite incomprehensible how, in the time of the
heaviest armor, they could strike a blow, or possess any freedom of
movement, except such as a turtle is capable of; and, in truth, they are
said not to have been able to rise up when overthrown.  They probably
stuck out their lances, and rode straight at the enemy, depending upon
upsetting him by their mass and weight.  In the row of knights is Henry
VIII.; also Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, who must have been an
immensely bulky man; also, a splendid suit of armor, gilded all over,
presented by the city of London to Charles I.; also, two or three suits
of boys' armor, for the little princes of the House of Stuart.  They
began to wear these burdens betimes, in order that their manhood might be
the more tolerant of them.  We went through this gallery so hastily that
it would have been about as well not to have seen it at all.

This is an atom: 
Then we went up a winding stair to another room, containing armor and
weapons, and beautiful brass cannon, that appeared to have been for
ornament rather than use, some of them being quite covered with embossed
sculpture, marvellously well wrought.  In this room was John of Gaunt's
suit, indicating a man seven feet high, and the armor seems to bear the
marks of much wear; but this may be owing to great scrubbing, throughout
the centuries since John of Gaunt died.  There, too, we saw the cloak in
which Wolfe fell, on the Plains of Abraham,--a coarse, faded, threadbare,
light-colored garment, folded up under a glass case.  Many other things
we might have seen, worthy of being attended to, had there been time to
look at them.

This is an atom: 
Following into still another room, we were told that this was Sir Walter
Raleigh's apartment, while confined in the Tower, so that it was within
these walls that he wrote the History of the World.  The room was
formerly lighted by lancet windows, and must have been very gloomy; but,
if he had the whole length of it to himself, it was a good space to walk
and meditate in.  On one side of the apartment is a low door, giving
admittance, we were told, to the cell where Raleigh slept; so we went in,
and found it destitute of any window, and so dark that we could not
estimate its small extent except by feeling about.  At the threshold of
this sleeping-kennel, there were one or two inscriptions, scratched in
the wall, but not, I believe, by Raleigh.

This is an atom: 
In this apartment, among a great many other curious things, are shown the
devilish instruments of torture which the Spaniards were bringing to
England in their Armada; and, at the end of the room, sits Queen
Elizabeth on horseback, in her high ruff and faded finery.  Very likely
none of these clothes were ever on her actual person.  Here, too, we saw
a headsman's block,--not that on which Raleigh was beheaded, which I
would have given gold to see, but the one which was used for the Scotch
Lords Kilmarnock, Lovat, and others, executed on account of the Rebellion
of 1745.  It is a block of oak, about two feet high, with a large knot in
it, so that it would not easily be split by a blow of the axe; hewn and
smoothed in a very workmanlike way, and with a hollow to accommodate the
head and shoulders on each side.  There were two or three very strong
marks of the axe in the part over which the neck lay, and several smaller
cuts; as if the first stroke nearly severed the head, and then the
chopping off was finished by smaller blows, as we see a butcher cutting
meat with his cleaver.  A headsman's axe was likewise shown us,--its date
unknown.

This is an atom: 
In the White Tower we were shown the Regalia, under a glass, and within
an iron cage.  Edward the Confessor's golden staff was very finely
wrought; and there were a great many pretty things; but I have a
suspicion, I know not why, that these are not the real jewels,--at least,
that such inestimable ones as the Koh-i-noor (or however it is spelt) are
less freely exhibited.

This is an atom: 
The warder then led us into a paved court, which he said was the place of
execution of all royal personages and others, who, from motives of fear
or favor, were beheaded privately.  Raleigh was among these, and so was
Anne Boleyn.  We then followed to the Beauchamp Tower, where many state
prisoners of note were confined, and where, on the walls of one of the
chambers, there are several inscriptions and sculptures of various
devices, done by the prisoners,--and very skilfully done, too, though
perhaps with no better instrument than an old nail.  These poor wretches
had time and leisure enough to spend upon their work.  This chamber is
lighted by small lancet windows, pierced at equal intervals round the
circle of the Beauchamp Tower; and it contains a large, square fireplace,
in which is now placed a small modern stove.  We were hurried away,
before we could even glance at the inscriptions, and we saw nothing else,
except the low, obscure doorway in the Bloody Tower, leading to the
staircase, under which were found the supposed bones of the little
princes; and lastly, the round, Norman arch, opening to the water
passage, called the Traitor's Gate.  Finally, we ate some cakes and buns
in the refreshment-room connected with the ticket-office, and then left
the fortress.  The ancient moat, by the way, has been drained within a
few years, and now forms a great hollow space, with grassy banks, round
about the citadel.

This is an atom: 
We now wished to see the Thames, and therefore threaded our way along
Thames Street, towards London Bridge, passing through a fish-market,
which I suppose to be the actual Billingsgate, whence originated all the
foul language in England.  Under London Bridge there is a station for
steamers running to Greenwich and Woolwich.  We got on board one of
these, not very well knowing, nor much caring, whither it might take us,
and steamed down the river, which is bordered with the shabbiest,
blackest, ugliest, meanest buildings: it is the back side of the town;
and, in truth, the muddy tide of the Thames deserves to see no better.
There was a great deal of shipping in the river, and many steamers, and
it was much more crowded than the Mersey, where all the ships go into
docks; but the vessels were not so fine.  By and by we reached Greenwich,
and went ashore there, proceeding up from the quay, past beer-shops and
eating-houses in great numbers and variety.  Greenwich Hospital is here a
very prominent object, and after passing along its extensive front,
facing towards the river, we entered one of the principal gates, as we
found ourselves free to do.

This is an atom: 
We now left the hospital, and steamed back to London Bridge, whence we
went up into the city, and, to finish the labors of the day, ascended the
Monument.  This seems to be still a favorite adventure with the cockneys;
for we heard one woman, who went up with us, saying that she had been
thinking of going up all her life, and another said that she had gone up
thirty years ago.  There is an iron railing, or rather a cage, round the
top, through which it would be impossible for people to force their way,
in order to precipitate themselves, as six persons have heretofore done.
There was a mist over London, so that we did not gain a very clear view,
except of the swarms of people running about, like ants, in the streets
at the foot of the Monument.

This is an atom: 
Descending, I put S----- and the children into a cab, and I myself
wandered about the city.  Passing along Fleet Street, I turned in through
an archway, which I rightly guessed to be the entrance to the Temple.  It
is a very large space, containing many large, solemn, and serious
edifices of dark brick, and no sooner do you pass under the arch than all
the rumble and bustle of London dies away at once; and it seems as if a
person might live there in perfect quiet, without suspecting that it was
not always a Sabbath.  People appear to have their separate residences
here; but I do not understand what is the economy of their lives.  Quite
in the deepest interior of this region, there is a large garden,
bordering on the Thames, along which it has a gravel-walk, and benches
where it would be pleasant to sit.  On one edge of the garden, there is
some scanty shrubbery, and flowers of no great brilliancy; and the
greensward, with which the garden is mostly covered, is not particularly
rich nor verdant.

This is an atom: 
Emerging from the Temple, I stopped at a tavern in the Strand, the waiter
of which observed to me, "They say Sebastopol is taken, sir!"  It was
only such an interesting event that could have induced an English waiter
to make a remark to a stranger, not called for in the way of business.

This is an atom: 
The best view we had of the town--in fact, the only external view, and
the only time we really saw the White Tower--was from the river, as we
steamed past it.  Here the high, square, battlemented White Tower, with
the four turrets at its corners, rises prominently above all other parts
of the fortress.

This is an atom: 
September 13th.--Mr. ------, the American Minister, called on me on
Tuesday, and left his card; an intimation that I ought sooner to have
paid my respects to him; so yesterday forenoon I set out to find his
residence, 56 Harley Street.  It is a street out of Cavendish Square, in
a fashionable quarter, although fashion is said to be ebbing away from
it.  The ambassador seems to intend some little state in his
arrangements; but, no doubt, the establishment compares shabbily enough
with those of the legations of other great countries, and with the houses
of the English aristocracy.  A servant, not in livery, or in a very
unrecognizable one, opened the door for me, and gave my card to a sort of
upper attendant, who took it in to Mr. ------.  He had three gentlemen
with him, so desired that I should be ushered into the office of the
legation, until he should be able to receive me.  Here I found a clerk or
attache, Mr. M------, who has been two or three years on this side of the
water; an intelligent person, who seems to be in correspondence with the
New York Courier and Enquirer.  By and by came in another American to get
a passport for the Continent, and soon the three gentlemen took leave of
the ambassador, and I was invited to his presence.

This is an atom: 
The tall, large figure of Mr. ------ has a certain air of state and
dignity; he carries his head in a very awkward way, but still looks like
a man of long and high authority, and, with his white hair, is now quite
venerable.  There is certainly a lack of polish, a kind of rusticity,
notwithstanding which you feel him to be a man of the world.  I should
think he might succeed very tolerably in English society, being heavy and
sensible, cool, kindly, and good-humored, with a great deal of experience
of life.  We talked about various matters, politics among the rest; and
he observed that if the President had taken the advice which he gave him
in two long letters, before his inauguration, he would have had a
perfectly quiet and successful term of office.  The advice was, to form a
perfectly homogeneous cabinet of Union men, and to satisfy the extremes
of the party by a fair distribution of minor offices; whereas he formed
his cabinet of extreme men, on both sides, and gave the minor offices to
moderate ones.  But the antislavery people, surely, had no representative
in the cabinet.  Mr. ------ further observed, that he thought the
President had a fair chance of re-nomination, for that the South could
not, in honor, desert him; to which I replied that the South had been
guilty of such things heretofore.  Mr. ------ thinks that the next
Presidential term will be more important and critical, both as to our
foreign relations and internal affairs, than any preceding one,--which I
should judge likely enough to be the case, although I heard the sane
prophecy often made respecting the present term.

This is an atom: 
The ambassador dined with us at Rock Park a year or two ago, and I then
felt, and always feel, as if he were a man of hearty feeling and
simplicity, and certainly it would be unjust to conclude otherwise,
merely from the fact (very suspicious, it is true) of his having been a
life-long politician.  After we had got through a little matter of
business (respecting a young American who has enlisted at Liverpool), the
Minister rang his bell, and ordered another visitor to be admitted; and
so I took my leave.  In the other room I found the Secretary of
Legation,--a tall, slender man of about forty, with a small head and
face,--gentlemanly enough, sensible, and well informed, yet I should
judge, not quite up to his place.  There was also a Dr. B------ from
Michigan present, and I rather fancy the ambassador is quite as much
bored with visitors as the consul at Liverpool.  Before I left the
office, Mr. ------ came in with Miss Sarah Clarke on his arm.  She had
come thither to get her passport vised; and when her business was
concluded, we went out together.

This is an atom: 
She was going farther towards the West End, and I into the city; so we
soon parted, and I lost myself among the streets and squares, arriving at
last at Oxford Street, though even then I did not know whether my face
were turned cityward or in the opposite direction.  Crossing Regent
Street, however, I became sure of my whereabout, and went on through
Holborn, and sought hither and thither for Grace Church Street, in order
to find the American Consul, General Campbell; for I needed his aid to
get a bank post-bill cashed.  But I could not find the street, go where I
would; so at last I went to No. 65 Cheapside, and introduced myself to
Mr. ------, whom I already knew by letter, and by a good many of his
poems, which he has sent me, and by two excellent watches, which I bought
of him.  This establishment, though it has the ordinary front of dingy
brick, common to buildings in the city, looks like a time-long stand, the
old shop of a London tradesman, with a large figure of a watch over the
door, a great many watches (and yet no gorgeous show of them) in the
window, a low, dark front shop, and a little room behind, where there was
a chair or two.  Mr. ------ is a small, slender young man, quite
un-English in aspect, with black, curly hair, a thin, dark, colorless
visage, very animated and of quick expression, with a nervous
temperament. . . . He dismounted from a desk when my card was handed
to him, and turned to me with a vivid, glad look of recognition.

This is an atom: 
We talked, in the first place, about poetry and such matters, about
England and America, and the nature and depth of their mutual dislike,
and, of course, the slavery question came up, as it always does, in one
way or another.  Anon, I produced my bank post-bill; and Mr. ------
kindly engaged to identify me at the bank, being ready to swear to me, he
said, on the strength of my resemblance to my engraved portrait.  So we
set out for the Bank of England, and, arriving there, were directed to
the proper clerk, after much inquiry; but he told us that the bill was
not yet due, having been drawn at seven days, and having two still to
run,--which was the fact.  As I was almost shillingless, Mr. ------ now
offered to cash it for me.  He is very kind and good. . . . Arriving at
his shop again, he went out to procure the money, and soon returned with
it.  At my departure he gave me a copy of a new poem of his, entitled
"Verdicts," somewhat in the manner of Lowell's satire. . . . Mr. ------
resides now at Greenwich, whither he hoped I would come and see him on my
return to London.  Perhaps I will, for I like him.  It seems strange to
see an Englishman with so little physical ponderosity and obtuseness of
nerve.

This is an atom: 
After parting from him, it being three o'clock or thereabouts, I resumed
my wanderings about the city, of which I never weary as long as I can put
one foot before the other.

This is an atom: 
Seeing that the door of St. Paul's, under one of the semicircular
porches, was partially open, I went in, and found that the afternoon
service was about to be performed; so I remained to hear it, and to see
what I could of the cathedral.  What a total and admirable contrast
between this and a Gothic church! the latter so dim and mysterious, with
its various aisles, its intricacy of pointed arches, its dark walls and
columns and pavement, and its painted glass windows, bedimming even what
daylight might otherwise get into its eternal evening.  But this
cathedral was full of light, and light was proper to it.  There were no
painted windows, no dim recesses, but a wide and airy space beneath the
dome; and even through the long perspective of the nave there was no
obscurity, but one lofty and beautifully rounded arch succeeding to
another, as far as the eye could reach.  The walls were white, the
pavement constructed of squares of gray and white marble.  It is a most
grand and stately edifice, and its characteristic stems to be to continue
forever fresh and new; whereas such a church as Westminster Abbey must
have been as venerable as it is now from the first day when it grew to be
an edifice at all.  How wonderful man is in his works!  How glad I am
that there can be two such admirable churches, in their opposite styles,
as St. Paul's and Westminster Abbey!

This is an atom: 
The organ was played while I was there, and there was an anthem
beautifully chanted by voices that came from afar off and remotely above,
as if out of a sunny sky.  Meanwhile I looked at such monuments as were
near; chiefly those erected to military or naval men,--Picton, General
Ponsonby, Lord St. Vincent, and others; but against one of the pillars
stands a statue of Dr. Johnson,--a noble and thoughtful figure, with a
development of muscle befitting an athlete.  I doubt whether sculptors do
not err in point of taste, by making all their statues models of physical
perfection, instead of expressing by them the individual character and
habits of the man.  The statue in the market-place at Lichfield has more
of the homely truth of Johnson's actual personality than this.

This is an atom: 
St. Paul's, as yet, is by no means crowded with monuments; there is,
indeed, plenty of room for a mob of the illustrious, yet to come.  But it
seems to me that the character of the edifice would be injured by
allowing the monuments to be clustered together so closely as at
Westminster, by incrusting the walls with them, or letting the statues
throng about the pedestals of columns.  There must be no confusion in
such a cathedral as this, and I question whether the effect will ever be
better than it is now, when each monument has its distinct place, and as
your eye wanders around, you are not distracted from noting each marble
man, in his niche against the wall, or at the base of a marble pillar.
Space, distance, light, regularity, are to be preserved, even if the
result should be a degree of nakedness.

This is an atom: 
I saw Mr. Appleton of the Legation, and Dr. Brown, on the floor of the
cathedral.  They were about to go over the whole edifice, and had engaged
a guide for that purpose; but, as I intend to go thither again with
S-----, I did not accompany them, but went away the quicker that one of
the gentlemen put on his hat, and I was ashamed of being seen in company
with a man who could wear his hat in a cathedral.  Not that he meant any
irreverence; but simply felt that he was in a great public building,--as
big, nearly, as all out of doors,--and so forgot that it was a
consecrated place of worship.  The sky is the dome of a greater cathedral
than St. Paul's, and built by a greater architect than Sir Christopher
Wren, and yet we wear our hats unscrupulously beneath it.

This is an atom: 
I remember no other event of importance, except that I penetrated into a
narrow lane or court, either in the Strand or Fleet Street, where was a
tavern, calling itself the "Old Thatched House," and purporting to have
been Nell Gwyn's dairy.  I met with a great many alleys and obscure
archways, in the course of the day's wanderings.

This is an atom: 
September 14th.--Yesterday, in the earlier part of the day, it poured
with rain, and I did not go out till five o'clock in the afternoon; nor
did I then meet with anything interesting.  I walked through Albemarle
Street, for the purpose of looking at Murray's shop, but missed it
entirely, at my first inquisition.  The street is one of hotels,
principally, with only a few tradesmen's shops, and has a quiet,
aristocratic aspect.  On my return, down the other sidewalk, I did
discover the famous publisher's locality; but merely by the name
"Mr. Murray," engraved on a rather large brass plate, such as doctors
use, on the door.  There was no sign of a book, nor of its being a place
of trade in any way; and I should have taken the house to be, if not a
private mansion, then a lawyer's office.

This is an atom: 
At seven o'clock S-----, U----, and I went to dine with Mr. R---- S------
in Portland Place. . . . Mr. S------'s house is a very fine one, and he
gave us a very quiet, elegant, and enjoyable dinner, in much better taste
and with less fuss than some others we have attended elsewhere.  Mr.
S------ is a friend of Thackeray, and, speaking of the last number
of The Newcomes,--so touching that nobody can read it aloud without
breaking down,--he mentioned that Thackeray himself had read it to James
Russell Lowell and William Story in a cider-cellar!  I read all the
preceding numbers of The Newcomes to my wife, but happened not to have
an opportunity to read this last, and was glad of it,--knowing that my
eyes would fill, and my voice quiver.  Mr. S------ likes Thackeray, and
thinks him a good fellow.  Mr. S------ has a--or I don't know but I ought
better to say the--beautiful full-length picture of Washington by Stuart,
and I was proud to see that noblest face and figure here in England.  The
picture of a man beside whom, considered physically, any English nobleman
whom I have seen would look like common clay.

This is an atom: 
Speaking of Thackeray, I cannot but wonder at his coolness in respect to
his own pathos, and compare it with my emotions, when I read the last
scene of The Scarlet Letter to my wife, just after writing it,--tried to
read it rather, for my voice swelled and heaved, as if I were tossed up
and down on an ocean as it subsides after a storm.  But I was in a very
nervous state then, having gone through a great diversity of emotion,
while writing it, for many months.  I think I have never overcome my own
adamant in any other instance.

This is an atom: 
Tumblers, hand-organists, puppet-showmen, bagpipers, and all such vagrant
mirth-makers, are very numerous in the streets of London.  The other day,
passing through Fleet Street, I saw a crowd filling up a narrow court,
and high above their heads a tumbler, standing on his head, on the top of
a pole, that reached as high as the third story of the neighboring
Houses.  Sliding down the pole head foremost, he disappeared out of my
sight.  A multitude of Punches go the mounds continually.  Two have
passed through Hanover Street, where we reside, this morning.  The first
asked two shillings for his performance; so we sent him away.  The second
demanded, in the first place, half a crown; but finally consented to take
a shilling, and gave us the show at that price, though much maimed in its
proportions.  Besides the spectators in our windows, he had a little
crowd on the sidewalk, to whom he went round for contributions, but I did
not observe that anybody gave him so much as a halfpenny.  It is strange
to see how many people are aiming at the small change in your pocket.  In
every square a beggar-woman meets you, and turns back to follow your steps
with her miserable murmur.  At the street-crossings there are old men or
little girls with their brooms; urchins propose to brush your boots; and
if you get into a cab, a man runs to open the door for you, and touches
his hat for a fee, as he closes it again.

This is an atom: 
September 15th.--It was raining yesterday, and I kept within doors till
after four o'clock, when J----- and I took a walk into the city.  Seeing
the entrance to Clement's Inn, we went through it, and saw the garden,
with a kneeling bronze figure in it; and when just in the midst of the
Inn, I remembered that Justice Shallow was of old a student there.  I do
not well understand these Inns of Court, or how they differ from other
places.  Anybody seems to be free to reside in them, and a residence does
not seem to involve any obligation to study law, or to have any
connection therewith.  Clement's Inn consists of large brick houses,
accessible by narrow lanes and passages, but, by some peculiar privilege
or enchantment, enjoying a certain quiet and repose, though in close
vicinity to the noisiest part of the city.  I got bewildered in the
neighborhood of St. Paul's, and, try how I might to escape from it, its
huge dusky dome kept showing itself before me, through one street and
another.  In my endeavors to escape it, I at one time found myself in St.
John's Street, and was in hopes to have seen the old St. John's gate, so
familiar for above a century on the cover of the Gentleman's Magazine.
But I suppose it is taken down, for we went through the entire street, I
think, and saw no trace of it.  Either afterwards or before this we came
upon Smithfield, a large irregular square, filled up with pens for
cattle, of which, however, there were none in the market at that time.  I
leaned upon a post, at the western end of the square, and told J----- how
the martyrs had been burnt at Smithfield in Bloody Mary's days.  Again we
drifted back to St. Paul's; and, at last, in despair of ever getting out
of this enchanted region, I took a Hansom cab to Charing Cross, whence we
easily made our way home.

This is an atom: 
LIVERPOOL.

This is an atom: 
September 16th.--I took the ten-o'clock train yesterday morning from the
Euston station, and arrived at Liverpool at about five, passing through
the valley of Trent, without touching at Birmingham.  English scenery, on
the tracks, is the tamest of the tame, hardly a noticeable hill breaking
the ordinary gentle undulation of the landscape, but still the verdure
and finish of the fields and parks make it worth while to throw out a
glance now and then, as you rush by.  Few separate houses are seen, as in
America; but sometimes a village, with the square, gray, battlemented
tower of its Norman church, and rows of thatched cottages, reminding one
of the clustered mud-nests of swallows, under the eaves of a barn; here
and there a lazy little river, like the Trent; perhaps, if you look
sharply where the guide-book indicates, the turrets of an old castle in
the distance; perhaps the great steeple and spires of a cathedral;
perhaps the tall chimney of a manufactory; but, on the whole, the
traveller comes to his journey's end unburdened with a single new idea.
I observe that the harvest is not all gathered in as yet, and this
rainy weather must look very gloomy to the farmer.  I saw gleaners,
yesterday, in the stubble-fields.  There were two gentlemen in the same
railway-carriage with me, and we did not exchange half a dozen words the
whole day.

This is an atom: 
I am here, established at Mrs. Blodgett's boarding-house, which I find
quite full; insomuch that she had to send one of her sea-captains to
sleep in another house, in order to make room for me.  It is exclusively
American society: four shipmasters, and a doctor from Pennsylvania, who
has been travelling a year on the Continent, and who seems to be a man of
very active intelligence, interested in everything, and especially in
agriculture. . . . He asserted that we are fifty years ahead of England
in agricultural science, and that he could cultivate English soil to far
better advantage than English farmers do, and at vastly less expense.
Their tendency to cling to old ideas, which retards them in everything
else, keeps them behindhand in this matter too.  Really, I do not know
any other place in England where a man can be made so sensible that he
lives in a progressive world as here in Mrs. Blodgett's boarding-house.

This is an atom: 
The captains talk together about their voyages, and how they manage with
their unruly mates and crews; and how freights are in America, and the
prospects of business; and of equinoctial gales, and the qualities of
different ships, and their commanders, and how crews, mates, and masters
have all deteriorated since their remembrance. . . . But these men are
alive, and talk of real matters, and of matters which they know.  The
shipmasters who come to Mrs. Blodgett's are favorable specimens of their
class; being all respectable men, in the employ of good houses, and
raised by their capacity to the command of first-rate ships.  In my
official intercourse with them, I do not generally see their best side;
as they are seldom before me except as complainants, or when summoned to
answer to some complaint made by a seaman.  But hearing their daily talk,
and listening to what is in their minds, and their reminiscences of what
they have gone through, one becomes sensible that they are men of energy
and ability, fit to be trusted, and retaining a hardy sense of honor, and
a loyalty to their own country, the stronger because they have compared
it with many others.  Most of them are gentlemen, too, to a certain
extent,--some more than others, perhaps; and none to a very exquisite
point, or, if so, it is none the better for them as sailors or as men.

This is an atom: 
September 17th.--It is singular to feel a sense of my own country
returning upon me with the intercourse of the people whom I find
here. . . .

This is an atom: 
The doctor is much the most talkative of our company, and sometimes bores
me thereby; though he seldom says anything that is not either instructive
or amusing.  He tells a curious story of Prince Albert, and how he avails
himself of American sharp-shooting.  During the doctor's tour in
Scotland, which he has just finished, he became acquainted with one of
the Prince's attaches, who invited him very earnestly to join his Royal
highness's party, promising him a good gun, and a keeper to load it for
him, two good dogs, besides as many cigars as he could smoke and as much
wine as he could drink, on the condition that whatever game he shot
should be the Prince's.  "The Prince," said the attache, "is very fond of
having Americans in his shooting-parties, on  account of their being such
excellent shots; and there was one with him last year who shot so
admirably that his Royal Highness himself left off shooting in utter
astonishment."  The attache offered to introduce the doctor to the
Prince, who would be certain to receive him very graciously. . . .

This is an atom: 
I think, perhaps, we talk of kings and queens more at our table than
people do at other tables in England; not, of course, that we like them
better, or admire them more, but that they are curiosities.  Yet I would
not say that the doctor may not be susceptible on the point of royal
attentions; for he told us with great complacency how emphatically, on
two or three occasions, Louis Napoleon had returned his bow, and the last
time had turned and made some remark (evidently about the doctor) to the
Empress. . . .

This is an atom: 
I ought not to omit mentioning that he has been told in France that he
personally resembles the Emperor, and I suspect he is trying to heighten
the resemblance by training his mustache on the pattern of that which
adorns the imperial upper lip.  He is a genuine American character,
though modified by a good deal of travel; a very intelligent man, full of
various ability, with eyes all over him for any object of interest,--a
little of the bore, sometimes,--quick to appreciate character, with a
good deal of tact, gentlemanly in his manners, but yet lacking a deep and
delicate refinement.  Not but that Americans are as capable of this last
quality as other people are; but what with the circumstances amid which
we grow up, and the peculiar activity of our minds, we certainly do often
miss it.  By the by, he advanced a singular proposition the other
evening, namely, that the English people do not so well understand
comfort, or attain it so perfectly in their domestic arrangements, as we
do.  I thought he hardly supported this opinion so satisfactorily as some
of his other new ideas.

This is an atom: 
I saw in an American paper yesterday, that an opera, still unfinished,
had been written on the story of The Scarlet Letter, and that several
scenes of it had been performed successfully in New York.  I should think
it might possibly succeed as an opera, though it would certainly fail as
a play.

This is an atom: 
LONDON.

This is an atom: 
September 24th.--On Saturday, at half past three o'clock, I left
Liverpool by the London and Northwest Railway for London.  Mrs.
Blodgett's table had been thinned by several departures during the
week. . . . My mind had been considerably enlivened, and my sense of
American superiority renewed, by intercourse with these people; and there
is no danger of one's intellect becoming a standing pool in such society.
I think better of American shipmasters, too, than I did from merely
meeting them in my office.  They keep up a continual discussion of
professional matters, and of all things having any reference to their
profession; the laws of insurance, the rights of vessels in foreign
ports, the authority and customs of vessels of war with regard to
merchantmen, etc.,--with stories and casual anecdotes of their
sea-adventures, gales, shipwrecks, icebergs, and collisions of vessels,
and hair-breadth escapes.  Their talk runs very much on the sea, and on
the land as connected with the sea; and their interest does not seem to
extend very far beyond the wide field of their professional concerns.

This is an atom: 
Nothing remarkable occurred on the journey to London.  The greater part
of the way there were only two gentlemen in the same compartment with me;
and we occupied each our corner, with little other conversation than in
comparing watches at the various stations.  I got out of the carriage
only once, at Rugby, I think, and for the last seventy or eighty miles
the train did not stop.  There was a clear moon the latter part of the
journey, and the mist lay along the ground, looking very much like a
surface of water.  We reached London at about ten, and I found S-----
expecting me.

This is an atom: 
Yesterday the children went with Fanny to the Zoological Gardens; and,
after sending them off, S----- and I walked to Piccadilly, and there took
a cab for Kensington Gardens.  It was a delightful day,--the best of all
weather, the real English good weather,--more like an Indian summer than
anything else within my experience; a mellow sunshine, with great warmth
in it,--a soft, balmy air, with a slight haze through it.  If the sun
made us a little too warm, we had but to go into the shade to be
immediately refreshed.  The light of these days is very exquisite, so
gently bright, without any glare,--a veiled glow.  In short, it is the
kindliest mood of Nature, and almost enough to compensate for chill and
dreary months.  Moreover, there is more of such weather here than the
English climate has ever had credit for.

This is an atom: 
Kensington Gardens form an eminently beautiful piece of artificial
woodland and park scenery.  The old palace of Kensington, now inhabited
by the Duchess of Inverness, stands at one extremity; an edifice of no
great mark, built of brick, covering much ground, and low in proportion
to its extent.  In front of it, at a considerable distance, there is a
sheet of water; and in all directions there are vistas of wide paths
among noble trees, standing in groves, or scattered in clumps; everything
being laid out with free and generous spaces, so that you can see long
streams of sunshine among the trees, and there is a pervading influence
of quiet and remoteness.  Tree does not interfere with tree; the art of
man is seen conspiring with Nature, as if they had consulted together how
to make a beautiful scene, and had taken ages of quiet thought and tender
care to accomplish it.  We strolled slowly along these paths, and
sometimes deviated from them, to walk beneath the trees, many of the
leaves of which lay beneath our feet, yellow and brown, and with a
pleasant smell of vegetable decay.  These were the leaves of
chestnut-trees; the other trees (unless elms) have yet, hardly begun to
shed their foliage, although you can discern a sober change of line in
the woodland masses; and the trees individualize themselves by assuming
each its own tint, though in a very modest way.  If they could have
undergone the change of an American autumn, it would have been like
putting on a regal robe.  Autumn often puts one on in America, but it is
apt to be very ragged.

This is an atom: 
There were a good many well-dressed people scattered through the
grounds,--young men and girls, husbands with their wives and children,
nursery-maids and little babes playing about in the grass.  Anybody might
have entered the gardens, I suppose; but only well-dressed people were
there not, of the upper classes, but shop-keepers, clerks, apprentices,
and respectability of that sort.  It is pleasant to think that the people
have the freedom, and therefore the property, of parks like this, more
beautiful and stately than a nobleman can keep to himself.  The extent of
Kensington Gardens, when reckoned together with Hyde Park, from which it
is separated only by a fence of iron rods, is very great, comprising
miles of greensward and woodland.  The large artificial sheet of water,
called the Serpentine River, lies chiefly in Hyde Park, but comes
partly within the precincts of the gardens.  It is entitled to
honorable mention among the English lakes, being larger than some that
are world-celebrated,--several miles long, and perhaps a stone's-throw
across in the widest part.  It forms the paradise of a great many ducks
of various breeds, which are accustomed to be fed by visitors, and come
flying from afar, touching the water with their wings, and quacking
loudly when bread or cake is thrown to them.  I bought a bun of a little
hunchbacked man, who kept a refreshment-stall near the Serpentine, and
bestowed it pied-meal on these ducks, as we loitered along the bank.  We
left the park by another gate, and walked homeward, till we came to
Tyburnia, and saw the iron memorial which marks where the gallows used to
stand.  Thence we turned into Park Lane, then into Upper Grosvenor
Street, and reached Hanover Square sooner than we expected.

This is an atom: 
In the evening I walked forth to Charing Cross, and thence along the
Strand and Fleet Street, where I made no new discoveries, unless it were
the Mitre Tavern.  I mean to go into it some day.  The streets were much
thronged, and there seemed to be a good many young people,--lovers, it is
to be hoped,--who had spent the day together, and were going innocently
home.  Perhaps so,--perhaps not.

This is an atom: 
September 25th.--Yesterday forenoon J----- and I walked out, with no very
definite purpose; but, seeing a narrow passageway from the Strand down to
the river, we went through it, and gained access to a steamboat, plying
thence to London Bridge.  The fare was a halfpenny apiece, and the boat
almost too much crowded for standing-room.  This part of the river
presents the water-side of London in a rather pleasanter aspect than
below London Bridge,--the Temple, with its garden, Somerset House,--and
generally, a less tumble-down and neglected look about the buildings;
although, after all, the metropolis does not see a very stately face in
its mirror.  I saw Alsatia betwixt the Temple and Blackfriar's Bridge.
Its precincts looked very narrow, and not particularly distinguishable,
at this day, from the portions of the city on either side of it.  At
London Bridge we got aboard of a Woolwich steamer, and went farther down
the river, passing the Custom-House and the Tower, the only prominent
objects rising out of the dreary range of shabbiness which stretches
along close to the water's edge.

This is an atom: 
From this remote part of London we walked towards the heart of the city;
and, as we went, matters seemed to civilize themselves by degrees, and
the streets grew crowded with cabs, omnibuses, drays, and carts.  We
passed, I think, through Whitechapel, and, reaching St. Paul's, got into
an omnibus, and drove to Regent Street, whence it was but a step or two
home.

This is an atom: 
In the afternoon, at four o'clock, S----- and I went to call on the
American Ambassador and Miss L------.  The lady was not at home, but we
went in to see Mr. ------ and were shown into a stately drawing-room, the
furniture of which was sufficiently splendid, but rather the worse for
wear,--being hired furniture, no doubt.  The ambassador shortly appeared,
looking venerable, as usual,--or rather more so than usual,--benign, and
very pale.  His deportment towards ladies is highly agreeable and
prepossessing, and he paid very kind attention to S-----, thereby quite
confirming her previous good feeling towards him.  She thinks that he is
much changed since she saw him last, at dinner, at our house,--more
infirm, more aged, and with a singular depression in his manner.  I, too,
think that age has latterly come upon him with great rapidity.  He said
that Miss L------ was going home on the 6th of October, and that he
himself had long purposed going, but had received despatches which
obliged him to put off his departure.  The President, he said, had just
written, requesting him to remain till April, but this he was determined
not to do.  I rather think that he does really wish to return, and not
for any ambitious views concerning the Presidency, but from an old man's
natural desire to be at home, and among his own people.

This is an atom: 
S----- spoke to him about an order from the Lord Chamberlain for
admission to view the two Houses of Parliament; and the ambassador drew
from his pocket a colored silk handkerchief, and made a knot in it, in
order to remind himself to ask the Lord Chamberlain.  The homeliness of
this little incident has a sort of propriety and keeping with much of
Mr. ------'s manner, but I would rather not have him do so before English
people.  He arranged to send a close carriage for us to come and see him
socially this evening.  After leaving his house we drove round Hyde Park,
and thence to Portland Place, where we left cards for Mrs. Russell
Sturgis; thence into Regent's Park, thence home.  U---- and J-----
accompanied us throughout these drives, but remained in the carriage
during our call on Mr. ------.  In the evening I strolled out, and walked
as far as St. Paul's,--never getting enough of the bustle of London,
which may weary, but can never satisfy me.  By night London looks wild
and dreamy, and fills me with a sort of pleasant dread.  It was a clear
evening, with a bright English moon,--that is to say, what we Americans
should call rather dim.

This is an atom: 
September 26th.--Yesterday, at eleven, I walked towards Westminster
Abbey, and as I drew near the Abbey bells were clamorous for joy, chiming
merrily, musically, and, obstreperously,--the most rejoicing sound that
can be conceived; and we ought to have a chime of bells in every American
town and village, were it only to keep alive the celebration of the
Fourth of July.  I conjectured that there might have been another victory
over the Russians, that perhaps the northern side of Sebastopol had
surrendered; but soon I saw the riddle that these merry bells were
proclaiming.  There were a great many private carriages, and a large
concourse of loungers and spectators, near the door of the church that
stands close under the eaves of the Abbey.  Gentlemen and ladies, gayly
dressed, were issuing forth, carriages driving away, and others drawing
up to the door in their turn; and, in short, a marriage had just been
celebrated in the church, and this was the wedding-party.  The last time
I was there, Westminster was flinging out its great voice of joy for a
national triumph; now, for the happy union of two lovers.  What a mighty
sympathizer is this old Abbey!

This is an atom: 
It is pleasant to recognize the mould and fashion of English features
through the marble of many of the statues and busts in the Abbey, even
though they may be clad in Roman robes.  I am inclined to think them, in
many cases, faithful likenesses; and it brings them nearer to the mind,
to see these original sculptures,--you see the man at but one remove, as
if you caught his image in a looking-glass.  The bust of Gay seemed to me
very good,--a thoughtful and humorous sweetness in the face.  Goldsmith
has as good a position as any poet in the Abbey, his bust and tablet
filling the pointed arch over a door that seems to lead towards the
cloisters.  No doubt he would have liked to be assured of so conspicuous
a place.  There is one monument to a native American, "Charles Wragg,
Esq., of South Carolina,"--the only one, I suspect, in Westminster Abbey,
and he acquired this memorial by the most un-American of qualities, his
loyalty to his king.  He was one of the refugees leaving America in 1777,
and being shipwrecked on his passage the monument was put up by his
sister.  It is a small tablet with a representation of Mr. Wragg's
shipwreck at the base.  Next to it is the large monument of Sir
Cloudesley Shovel, which I think Addison ridicules,--the Admiral, in a
full-bottomed wig and Roman dress, but with a broad English face,
reclining with his head on his hand, and looking at you with great
placidity.  I stood at either end of the nave, and endeavored to take in
the full beauty and majesty of the edifice; but apparently was not in a
proper state of mind, for nothing came of it.  It is singular how like an
avenue of overarching trees are these lofty aisles of a cathedral.

This is an atom: 
Leaving the Abbey about one o'clock, I walked into the city as far
as Grace Church Street, and there called on the American Consul,
General ------, who had been warmly introduced to me last year by a
letter from the President.  I like the General; a kindly and honorable
man, of simple manners and large experience of life.  Afterwards I called
on Mr. Oakford, an American connected in business with Mr. Crosby, from
whom I wanted some information as to the sailing of steamers from
Southampton to Lisbon.  Mr. Crosby was not in town. . . .

This is an atom: 
At eight o'clock Mr. ------ sent his carriage, according to previous
arrangement, to take us to spend the evening socially.  Miss L------
received us with proper cordiality, and looked quite becomingly,--more
sweet and simple in aspect than when I have seen her in full dress.
Shortly the ambassador appeared, and made himself highly agreeable; not
that he is a brilliant conversationist, but his excellent sense and
good-humor, and all that he has seen and been a part of, are sufficient
resources to draw upon.  We talked of the Queen, whom he spoke of with
high respect; . . . . of the late Czar, whom he knew intimately while
minister to Russia,--and he quite confirms all that has been said about
the awful beauty of his person.  Mr. ------'s characterization of him was
quite favorable; he thought better of his heart than most people, and
adduced his sports with a school of children,--twenty of whom, perhaps,
he made to stand rigidly in a row, like so many bricks,--then, giving one
a push, would laugh obstreperously to see the whole row tumble down.  He
would lie on his back, and allow the little things to scramble over him.
His Majesty admitted Mr. ------ to great closeness of intercourse, and
informed him of a conspiracy which was then on foot for the Czar's
murder.  On the evening, when the assassination was to take place, the
Czar did not refrain from going to the public place where it was to be
perpetrated, although, indeed, great precautions had been taken to
frustrate the schemes of the conspirators.  Mr. ------ said, that, in
case the plot had succeeded, all the foreigners, including himself, would
likewise have been murdered, the native Russians having a bitter hatred
against foreigners.  He observed that he had been much attached to the
Czar, and had never joined in the English abuse of him.  His sympathies,
however, are evidently rather English than Russian, in this war.
Speaking of the present emperor, he said that Lord Heytebury, formerly
English ambassador in Russia, lately told him that he complimented the
Czar Nicholas on the good qualities of his son, saying that he was
acknowledged by all to be one of the most amiable youths in the world.
"Too amiable, I fear, for his position," answered the Czar.  "He has too
much of his mother in him."

This is an atom: 
September 27th.--Yesterday, much earlier than English people ever do such
things, General ------ made us a call on his way to the Consulate, and
sat talking a stricken hour or thereabouts.  Scarcely had he gone when
Mrs. Oakford and her daughter came.  After sitting a long while, they
took U---- to their house, near St. John's Wood, to spend the night.  I
had been writing my journal and official correspondence during such
intervals as these calls left me; and now, concluding these businesses,
S-----, J-----, and I went out and took a cab for the terminus of the
Crystal Palace Railway, whither we proceeded over Waterloo Bridge, and
reached the palace not far from three o'clock.  It was a beautifully
bright day, such as we have in wonderful succession this month.  The
Crystal Palace gleamed in the sunshine; but I do not think a very
impressive edifice can be built of glass,--light and airy, to be sure,
but still it will be no other than an overgrown conservatory.  It is
unlike anything else in England; uncongenial with the English character,
without privacy, destitute of mass, weight, and shadow, unsusceptible of
ivy, lichens, or any mellowness from age.

This is an atom: 
The train of carriages stops within the domain of the palace, where there
is a long ascending corridor up into the edifice.  There was a very
pleasant odor of heliotrope diffused through the air; and, indeed, the
whole atmosphere of the Crystal Palace is sweet with various
flower-scents, and mild and balmy, though sufficiently fresh and cool.
It would be a delightful climate for invalids to spend the winter in; and
if all England could be roofed over with glass, it would be a great
improvement on its present condition.

This is an atom: 
The first thing we did, before fairly getting into the palace, was to sit
down in a large ante-hall, and get some bread and butter and a pint of
Bass's pale ale, together with a cup of coffee for S-----.  This was the
best refreshment we could find at that spot; but farther within we found
abundance of refreshment-rooms, and John Bull and his wife and family at
fifty little round tables, busily engaged with cold fowl, cold beef, ham,
tongue, and bottles of ale and stout, and half-pint decanters of sherry.
The English probably eat with more simple enjoyment than any other
people; not ravenously, as we often do, and not exquisitely and
artificially, like the French, but deliberately and vigorously, and with
due absorption in the business, so that nothing good is lost upon
them. . . . It is remarkable how large a feature the refreshment-rooms
make in the arrangements of the Crystal Palace.

This is an atom: 
The Crystal Palace is a gigantic toy for the English people to play with.
The design seems to be to reproduce all past ages, by representing the
features of their interior architecture, costume, religion, domestic
life, and everything that can be expressed by paint and plaster; and,
likewise, to bring all climates and regions of the earth within these
enchanted precincts, with their inhabitants and animals in living
semblance, and their vegetable productions, as far as possible, alive and
real.  Some part of the design is already accomplished to a wonderful
degree.  The Indian, the Egyptian, and especially the Arabian, courts are
admirably executed.  I never saw or conceived anything so gorgeous as the
Alhambra.  There are Byzantine and mediaeval representations, too,--
reproductions of ancient apartments, decorations, statues from tombs,
monuments, religious and funereal,--that gave me new ideas of what
antiquity has been.  It takes down one's overweening opinion of the
present time, to see how many kinds of beauty and magnificence have
heretofore existed, and are now quite passed away and forgotten; and to
find that we, who suppose that, in all matters of taste, our age is the
very flower-season of the time,--that we are poor and meagre as to many
things in which they were rich.  There is nothing gorgeous now.  We live
a very naked life.  This was the only reflection I remember making, as we
passed from century to century, through the succession of classic,
Oriental, and mediaeval courts, adown the lapse of time,--seeing all
these ages in as brief a space as the Wandering Jew might glance along
them in his memory.  I suppose a Pompeian house with its courts and
interior apartments was as faithfully shown as it was possible to do it.
I doubt whether I ever should feel at home in such a house.

This is an atom: 
In the pool of a fountain, of which there are several beautiful ones
within the palace, besides larger ones in the garden before it, we saw
tropical plants growing,--large water-lilies of various colors, some
white, like our Concord pond-lily, only larger, and more numerously
leafed.  There were great circular green leaves, lying flat on the water,
with a circumference equal to that of a centre-table.  Tropical trees,
too, varieties of palm and others, grew in immense pots or tubs, but
seemed not to enjoy themselves much.  The atmosphere must, after all, be
far too cool to bring out their native luxuriance; and this difficulty
can never be got over at a less expense than that of absolutely stewing
the visitors and attendants.  Otherwise, it would be very practicable to
have all the vegetable world, at least, within these precincts.

This is an atom: 
The palace is very large, and our time was short, it being desirable to
get home early; so, after a stay of little more than two hours, we took
the rail back again, and reached Hanover Square at about six.  After tea
I wandered forth, with some thought of going to the theatre, and, passing
the entrance of one, in the Strand, I went in, and found a farce in
progress.  It was one of the minor theatres, very minor indeed; but the
pieces, so far as I saw them, were sufficiently laughable.  There were
some Spanish dances, too, very graceful and pretty.  Between the plays a
girl from the neighboring saloon came to the doors of the boxes, offering
lemonade and ginger-beer to the occupants.  A person in my box took a
glass of lemonade, and shared it with a young lady by his side, both
sipping out of the same glass.  The audience seemed rather heavy,--not
briskly responsive to the efforts of the performers, but good-natured,
and willing to be pleased, especially with some patriotic dances, in
which much waving and intermingling of the French and English flags was
introduced.  Theatrical performances soon weary me of late years; and I
came away before the curtain rose on the concluding piece.

This is an atom: 
September 28th.--8---- and I walked to Charing Cross yesterday forenoon,
and there took a Hansom cab to St. Paul's Cathedral.  It had been a
thick, foggy morning, but had warmed and brightened into one of the
balmiest and sunniest of noons.  As we entered the cathedral, the long
bars of sunshine were falling from its upper windows through the great
interior atmosphere, and were made visible by the dust, or mist, floating
about in it.  It is a grand edifice, and I liked it quite as much as on
my first view of it, although a sense of coldness and nakedness is felt
when we compare it with Gothic churches.  It is more an external work
than the Gothic churches are, and is not so made out of the dim, awful,
mysterious, grotesque, intricate nature of man.  But it is beautiful and
grand.  I love its remote distances, and wide, clear spaces, its airy
massiveness; its noble arches, its sky-like dome, which, I think, should
be all over light, with ground-glass, instead of being dark, with only
diminutive windows.

This is an atom: 
We walked round, looking at the monuments, which are so arranged, at the
bases of columns and in niches, as to coincide with the regularity of the
cathedral, and be each an additional ornament to the whole, however
defective individually as works of art.  We thought that many of these
monuments were striking and impressive, though there was a pervading
sameness of idea,--a great many Victorys and Valors and Britannias, and a
great expenditure of wreaths, which must have cost Victory a considerable
sum at any florist's whom she patronizes.  A very great majority of the
memorials are to naval and military men, slain in Bonaparte's wars; men
in whom one feels little or no interest (except Picton, Abercrombie,
Moore, Nelson, of course, and a few others really historic), they having
done nothing remarkable, save having been shot, nor shown any more brains
than the cannonballs that killed them.  All the statues have the dust of
years upon then, strewn thickly in the folds of their marble garments,
and on any limb stretched horizontally, and on their noses, so that the
expression is much obscured.  I think the nation might employ people to
brush away the dust from the statues of its heroes.  But, on the whole,
it is very fine to look through the broad arches of the cathedral, and
see, at the foot of some distant pillar, a group of sculptured figures,
commemorating some man and deed that (whether worth remembering or not)
the nation is so happy as to reverence.  In Westminster Abbey, the
monuments are so crowded, and so oddly patched together upon the walls,
that they are ornamental only in a mural point of view; and, moreover,
the quaint and grotesque taste of many of them might well make the
spectator laugh,--an effect not likely to be produced by the monuments in
St. Paul's.  But, after all, a man might read the walls of the Abbey day
after day with ever-fresh interest, whereas the cold propriety of the
cathedral would weary him in due time.

This is an atom: 
We did not ascend to the galleries and other points of interest aloft,
nor go down into the vaults, where Nelson's sarcophagus is shown, and
many monuments of the old Gothic cathedral, which stood on this site,
before the great fire.  They say that these lower regions are comfortably
warm and dry; but as we walked round in front, within the iron railing of
the churchyard, we passed an open door, giving access to the crypt, and
it breathed out a chill like death upon us.

This is an atom: 
It is pleasant to stand in the centre of the cathedral, and hear the
noise of London, loudest all round this spot,--how it is calmed into a
sound as proper to be heard through the aisles as the tones of its own
organ.  If St. Paul's were to be burnt again (having already been bunt
and risen three or four times since the sixth century), I wonder whether
it would ever be rebuilt in the same spot!  I doubt whether the city and
the nation are so religious as to consecrate their midmost heart for the
site of a church, where land would be so valuable by the square inch.

This is an atom: 
Coming from the cathedral, we went through Paternoster Row, and saw Ave
Mary Lane; all this locality appearing to have got its nomenclature from
monkish personages.  We now took a cab for the British Museum, but found
this to be one of the days on which strangers are not admitted; so we
slowly walked into Oxford Street, and then strolled homeward, till,
coming to a sort of bazaar, we went in and found a gallery of pictures.
This bazaar proved to be the Pantheon, and the first picture we saw in
the gallery was Haydon's Resurrection of Lazarus,--a great height and
breadth of canvas, right before you as you ascend the stairs.  The face
of Lazarus is very awful, and not to be forgotten; it is as true as if
the painter had seen it, or had been himself the resurrected man and felt
it; but the rest of the picture signified nothing, and is vulgar and
disagreeable besides.  There are several other pictures by Haydon in this
collection,--the Banishment of Aristides, Nero with his Harp, and the
Conflagration of Rome; but the last is perfectly ridiculous, and all of
them are exceedingly unpleasant.  I should be sorry to live in a house
that contained one of them.  The best thing of Haydon was a hasty dash of
a sketch for a small, full-length portrait of Wordsworth, sitting on the
crag of a mountain.  I doubt whether Wordsworth's likeness has ever been
so poetically brought out.  This gallery is altogether of modern
painters, and it seems to be a receptacle for pictures by artists who can
obtain places nowhere else,--at least, I never heard of their names
before.  They were very uninteresting, almost without exception, and yet
some of the pictures were done cleverly enough.  There is very little
talent in this world, and what there is, it seems to me, is pretty well
known and acknowledged.  We don't often stumble upon geniuses in obscure
corners.

This is an atom: 
Leaving the gallery, we wandered through the rest of the bazaar, which is
devoted to the sale of ladies' finery, jewels, perfumes, children's toys,
and all manner of small and pretty rubbish. . . . In the evening I
again sallied forth, and lost myself for an hour or two; at last
recognizing my whereabouts in Tottenham Court Road.  In such quarters of
London it seems to be the habit of people to take their suppers in the
open air.  You see old women at the corners, with kettles of hot water
for tea or coffee; and as I passed a butcher's open shop, he was just
taking out large quantities of boiled beef, smoking hot.  Butchers'
stands are remarkable for their profuse expenditure of gas; it belches
forth from the pipes in great flaring jets of flame, uncovered by any
glass, and broadly illuminating the neighborhood.  I have not observed
that London ever goes to bed.

This is an atom: 
September 29th.--Yesterday we walked to the British Museum.  A sentinel
or two kept guard before the gateway of this extensive edifice in Great
Russell Street, and there was a porter at the lodge, and one or two
policemen lounging about, but entrance was free, and we walked in without
question.  Officials and policemen were likewise scattered about the
great entrance-hall, none of whom, however, interfered with us; so we
took whatever way we chose, and wandered about at will.  It is a
hopeless, and to me, generally, a depressing business to go through an
immense multifarious show like this, glancing at a thousand things, and
conscious of some little titillation of mind from them, but really taking
in nothing, and getting no good from anything.  One need not go beyond
the limits of the British Museum to be profoundly accomplished in all
branches of science, art, and literature; only it would take a lifetime
to exhaust it in any one department; but to see it as we did, and with no
prospect of ever seeing it more at leisure, only impressed me with the
truth of the old apothegm, "Life is short, and Art is long."  The fact
is, the world is accumulating too many materials for knowledge.  We do
not recognize for rubbish what is really rubbish; and under this head
might be reckoned very many things one sees in the British Museum; and,
as each generation leaves its fragments and potsherds behind it, such
will finally be the desperate conclusion of the learned.

This is an atom: 
We went first among some antique marbles,--busts, statues, terminal gods,
with several of the Roman emperors among them.  We saw here the bust
whence Haydon took his ugly and ridiculous likeness of Nero,--a foolish
thing to do.  Julius Caesar was there, too, looking more like a modern
old man than any other bust in the series.  Perhaps there may be a
universality in his face, that gives it this independence of race and
epoch.  We glimpsed along among the old marbles,--Elgin and others, which
are esteemed such treasures of art;--the oddest fragments, many of them
smashed by their fall from high places, or by being pounded to pieces by
barbarians, or gnawed away by time; the surface roughened by being rained
upon for thousands of years; almost always a nose knocked off; sometimes
a headless form; a great deficiency of feet and hands,--poor, maimed
veterans in this hospital of incurables.  The beauty of the most perfect
of them must be rather guessed at, and seen by faith, than with the
bodily eye; to look at the corroded faces and forms is like trying to see
angels through mist and cloud.  I suppose nine tenths of those who seem
to be in raptures about these fragments do not really care about them;
neither do I.  And if I were actually moved, I should doubt whether it
were by the statues or by my own fancy.

This is an atom: 
We passed, too, through Assyrian saloons and Egyptian saloons,--all full
of monstrosities and horrible uglinesses, especially the Egyptian, and
all the innumerable relics that I saw of them in these saloons, and among
the mummies, instead of bringing me closer to them, removed me farther
and farther; there being no common ground of sympathy between them and
us.  Their gigantic statues are certainly very curious.  I saw a hand and
arm up to the shoulder fifteen feet in length, and made of some stone
that seemed harder and heavier than granite, not having lost its polish
in all the rough usage that it has undergone.  There was a fist on a
still larger scale, almost as big as a hogshead.  Hideous, blubber-lipped
faces of giants, and human shapes with beasts' heads on them.  The
Egyptian controverted Nature in all things, only using it as a groundwork
to depict, the unnatural upon.  Their mummifying process is a result of
this tendency.  We saw one very perfect mummy,--a priestess, with
apparently only one more fold of linen betwixt us and her antique flesh,
and this fitting closely to her person from head to foot, so that we
could see the lineaments of her face and the shape of her limbs as
perfectly as if quite bare.  I judge that she may have been very
beautiful in her day,--whenever that was.  One or two of the poor thing's
toes (her feet were wonderfully small and delicate) protruded from the
linen, and, perhaps, not having been so perfectly embalmed, the flesh had
fallen away, leaving only some little bones.  I don't think this young
woman has gained much by not turning to dust in the time of the Pharaohs.
We also saw some bones of a king that had been taken out of a pyramid; a
very fragmentary skeleton.  Among the classic marbles I peeped into an
urn that once contained the ashes of dead people, and the bottom still
had an ashy hue.  I like this mode of disposing of dead bodies; but it
would be still better to burn them and scatter the ashes, instead of
hoarding them up,--to scatter them over wheat-fields or flowerbeds.

This is an atom: 
Besides these antique halls, we wandered through saloons of antediluvian
animals, some set up in skeletons, others imprisoned in solid stone; also
specimens of still extant animals, birds, reptiles, shells, minerals,--
the whole circle of human knowledge and guess-work,--till I wished that
the whole Past might be swept away, and each generation compelled to bury
and destroy whatever it had produced, before being permitted to leave the
stage.  When we quit a house, we are expected to make it clean for the
next occupant; why ought we not to leave a clean world for the next
generation?  We did not see the library of above half a million of
volumes; else I suppose I should have found full occasion to wish that
burnt and buried likewise.  In truth, a greater part of it is as good as
buried, so far as any readers are concerned.  Leaving the Museum, we
sauntered home.  After a little rest, I set out for St. John's Wood, and
arrived thither by dint of repeated inquiries.  It is a pretty suburb,
inhabited by people of the middling class.  U---- met me joyfully, but
seemed to have had a good time with Mrs. Oakford and her daughter; and,
being pressed to stay to tea, I could not well help it.  Before tea I sat
talking with Mrs. Oakford and a friend of hers, Miss Clinch, about the
Americans and the English, especially dwelling on the defects of the
latter,--among which we reckoned a wretched meanness in money
transactions, a lack of any embroidery of honor and liberality in their
dealings, so that they require close watching, or they will be sure to
take you at advantage.  I hear this character of them from Americans on
all hands, and my own experience confirms it as far as it goes, not
merely among tradespeople, but among persons who call themselves
gentlefolks.  The cause, no doubt, or one cause, lies in the fewer
chances of getting money here, the closer and sharper regulation of all
the modes of life; nothing being left to liberal and gentlemanly
feelings, except fees to servants.  They are not gamblers in England, as
we to some extent are; and getting their money painfully, or living
within an accurately known income, they are disinclined to give up so
much as a sixpence that they can possibly get.  But the result is, they
are mean in petty things.

This is an atom: 
By and by Mr. Oakford came in, well soaked with the heaviest shower that
I ever knew in England, which had been rattling on the roof of the little
side room where we sat, and had caught him on the outside of the omnibus.
At a little before eight o'clock I came home with U---- in a cab,--the
gaslight glittering on the wet streets through which we drove, though the
sky was clear overhead.

This is an atom: 
September 30th.--Yesterday, a little before twelve, we took a cab, and
went to the two Houses of Parliament,--the most immense building,
methinks, that ever was built; and not yet finished, though it has now
been occupied for years.  Its exterior lies hugely along the ground, and
its great unfinished tower is still climbing towards the sky; but the
result (unless it be the riverfront, which I have not yet seen) seems not
very impressive.  The interior is much more successful.  Nothing can be
more magnificent and gravely gorgeous than the Chamber of Peers,--a large
oblong hall, panelled with oak, elaborately carved, to the height of
perhaps twenty feet.  Then the balustrade of the gallery runs around the
hall, and above the gallery are six arched windows on each side, richly
painted with historic subjects.  The roof is ornamented and gilded, and
everywhere throughout there is embellishment of color and carving on the
broadest scale, and, at the same time, most minute and elaborate; statues
of full size in niches aloft; small heads of kings, no bigger than a
doll; and the oak is carved in all parts of the panelling as faithfully
as they used to do it in Henry VII's time,--as faithfully and with as
good workmanship, but with nothing like the variety and invention which I
saw in the dining-room of Smithell's Hall.  There the artist wrought with
his heart and head; but much of this work, I suppose, was done by
machinery.  Be that as it may, it is a most noble and splendid apartment,
and, though so fine, there is not a touch of finery; it glistens and
glows with even a sombre magnificence, owing to the rich, deep lines, and
the dim light, bedimmed with rich colors by coming through the painted
windows.  In arched recesses, that serve as frames, at each end of the
hall, there are three pictures by modern artists from English history;
and though it was not possible to see them well as pictures, they adorned
and enriched the walls marvellously as architectural embellishments.  The
Peers' seats are four rows of long sofas on each side, covered with red
morocco; comfortable seats enough, but not adapted to any other than a
decorously exact position.  The woolsack is between these two divisions
of sofas, in the middle passage of the floor,--a great square seat,
covered with scarlet, and with a scarlet cushion set up perpendicularly
for the Chancellor to lean against.  In front of the woolsack there is
another still larger ottoman, on which he might be at full length,--for
what purpose intended, I know not.  I should take the woolsack to be not
a very comfortable seat, though I suppose it was originally designed to
be the most comfortable one that could be contrived, in view of the
Chancellor's much sitting.

This is an atom: 
The throne is the first object you see on entering the hall, being close
to the door; a chair of antique form, with a high, peaked back, and a
square canopy above, the whole richly carved and quite covered with
burnished gilding, besides being adorned with rows of rock crystals,--
which seemed to me of rather questionable taste.

This is an atom: 
It is less elevated above the floor than one imagines it ought to be.
While we were looking at it, I saw two Americans,--Western men, I should
judge,--one of them with a true American slouch, talking to the policeman
in attendance, and describing our Senate Chamber in contrast with the
House of Lords.  The policeman smiled and ah-ed, and seemed to make as
courteous and liberal responses as he could.  There was quite a mixed
company of spectators, and, I think, other Americans present besides the
above two and ourselves.  The Lord Chamberlain's tickets appear to be
distributed with great impartiality.  There were two or three women of
the lower middle class, with children or babies in arms, one of whom
lifted up its voice loudly in the House of Peers.

This is an atom: 
We next, after long contemplating this rich hall, proceeded through
passages and corridors to a great central room, very beautiful, which
seems to be used for purposes of refreshment, and for electric
telegraphs; though I should not suppose this could be its primitive and
ultimate design.  Thence we went into the House of Commons, which is
larger than the Chamber of Peers, and much less richly ornamented, though
it would have appeared splendid had it come first in order.  The
speaker's chair, if I remember rightly, is loftier and statelier than the
throne itself.  Both in this hall and in that of the Lords, we were at
first surprised by the narrow limits within which the great ideas of the
Lords and Commons of England are physically realized; they would seem to
require a vaster space.  When we hear of members rising on opposite sides
of the House, we think of them as but dimly discernible to their
opponents, and uplifting their voices, so as to be heard afar; whereas
they sit closely enough to feel each other's spheres, to note all
expression of face, and to give the debate the character of a
conversation.  In this view a debate seems a much more earnest and real
thing than as we read it in a newspaper.  Think of the debaters meeting
each other's eyes, their faces flushing, their looks interpreting their
words, their speech growing into eloquence, without losing the
genuineness of talk!  Yet, in fact, the Chamber of Peers is ninety feet
long and half as broad, and high, and the Chamber of Commons is still
larger.

This is an atom: 
Thence we went to Westminster Hall, through a gallery with statues on
each side,--beautiful statues too, I thought; seven of them, of which
four were from the times of the civil wars,--Clarendon, Falkland,
Hampden, Selden, Somers, Mansfield, and Walpole.  There is room for more
in this corridor, and there are niches for hundreds of their marble
brotherhood throughout the edifice; but I suppose future ages will have
to fill the greater part of them.  Yet I cannot help imagining that this
rich and noble edifice has more to do with the past than with the future;
that it is the glory of a declining empire; and that the perfect bloom of
this great stone flower, growing out of the institutions of England,
forbodes that they have nearly lived out their life.  It sums up all.
Its beauty and magnificence are made out of ideas that are gone by.

This is an atom: 
We entered Westminster Hall (which is incorporated into this new edifice,
and forms an integral part of it) through a lofty archway, whence a
double flight of broad steps descends to the stone pavement.  After the
elaborate ornament of the rooms we had just been viewing, this venerable
hall looks extremely simple and bare,--a gray stone floor, gray and naked
stone walls, but a roof sufficiently elaborate, its vault being filled
with carved beams and rafters of chestnut, very much admired and wondered
at for the design and arrangement.  I think it would have pleased me more
to have seen a clear vaulted roof, instead of this intricacy of wooden
points, by which so much skylight space is lost.  They make (be it not
irreverently said) the vast and lofty apartment look like the ideal of an
immense barn.  But it is a noble space, and all without the support of a
single pillar.  It is about eighty of my paces from the foot of the steps
to the opposite end of the hall, and twenty-seven from side to side; very
high, too, though not quite proportionately to its other dimensions.  I
love it for its simplicity and antique nakedness, and deem it worthy to
have been the haunt and home of History through the six centuries since
it was built.  I wonder it does not occur to modern ingenuity to make a
scenic representation, in this very hall, of the ancient trials for life
or death, pomps, feasts, coronations, and every great historic incident
in the lives of kings, Parliaments, Protectors, and all illustrious men,
that have occurred here.  The whole world cannot show another hall such
as this, so tapestried with recollections of whatever is most striking in
human annals.

This is an atom: 
Westminster Abbey being just across the street, we went thither from the
hall, and sought out the cloisters, which we had not yet visited.  They
are in excellent preservation,--broad walks, canopied with intermingled
arches of gray stone, on which some sort of lichen, or other growth of
ages (which seems, however, to have little or nothing vegetable in it),
has grown.  The pavement is entirely made of flat tombstones, inscribed
with half-effaced names of the dead people beneath; and the wall all
round bears the marble tablets which give a fuller record of their
virtues.  I think it was from a meditation in these cloisters that
Addison wrote one of his most beautiful pieces in the Spectator.  It is a
pity that this old fashion of a cloistered walk is not retained in our
modern edifices; it was so excellent for shelter and for shade during a
thoughtful hour,--this sombre corridor beneath an arched stone roof, with
the central space of richest grass, on which the sun might shine or the
shower fall, while the monk or student paced through the prolonged
archway of his meditations.

This is an atom: 
As we came out from the cloisters, and walked along by the churchyard of
the Abbey, a woman came begging behind us very earnestly.  "A bit of
bread," she said, "and I will give you a thousand blessings!  Hunger is
hard to bear.  O kind gentleman and kind lady, a penny for a bit of
bread!  It is a hard thing that gentlemen and ladies should see poor
people wanting bread, and make no difference whether they are good or
bad."  And so she followed us almost all round the Abbey, assailing our
hearts in most plaintive terms, but with no success; for she did it far
too well to be anything but an impostor, and no doubt she had breakfasted
better, and was likely to have a better dinner, than ourselves.  And yet
the natural man cries out against the philosophy that rejects beggars.
It is a thousand to one that they are impostors, but yet we do ourselves
a wrong by hardening our hearts against them.  At last, without turning
round, I told her that I should give her nothing,--with some asperity,
doubtless, for the effort to refuse creates a bitterer repulse than is
necessary.  She still followed us a little farther, but at last gave it
up, with a deep groan.  I could not have performed this act of heroism on
my first arrival from America.

This is an atom: 
Whether the beggar-woman had invoked curses on us, and Heaven saw fit to
grant some slight response, I know not, but it now began to rain on my
wife's velvet; so I put her and J----- into a cab, and hastened to
ensconce myself in Westminster Abbey while the shower should last.
Poets' Corner has never seemed like a strange place to me; it has been
familiar from the very first; at all events, I cannot now recollect the
previous conception, of which the reality has taken the place.  I seem
always to have known that somewhat dim corner, with the bare brown
stone-work of the old edifice aloft, and a window shedding down its light
on the marble busts and tablets, yellow with time, that cover the three
walls of the nook up to a height of about twenty feet.  Prior's is the
largest and richest monument.  It is observable that the bust and
monument of Congreve are in a distant part of the Abbey.  His duchess
probably thought it a degradation to bring a gentleman among the beggarly
poets.

This is an atom: 
I walked round the aisles, and paced the nave, and came to the conclusion
that Westminster Abbey, both in itself and for the variety and interest
of its monuments, is a thousand times preferable to St. Paul's.  There is
as much difference as between a snow-bank and a chimney-corner in their
relation to the human heart.  By the by, the monuments and statues in the
Abbey seem all to be carefully dusted.

This is an atom: 
The shower being over, I walked down into the city, where I called on Mr.
B------ and left S-----'s watch to be examined and put in order.  He told
me that he and his brother had lately been laying out and letting a piece
of land at Blackheath, that had been left them by their father, and that
the ground-rent would bring them in two thousand pounds per annum.  With
such an independent income, I doubt whether any American would consent to
be anything but a gentleman,--certainly not an operative watchmaker.  How
sensible these Englishmen are in some things!

This is an atom: 
Thence I went at a venture, and lost myself, of course.  At one part of
my walk I came upon St. Luke's Hospital, whence I returned to St. Paul's,
and thence along Fleet Street and the Strand.  Contiguous to the latter
is Holywell Street,--a narrow lane, filled up with little bookshops and
bookstalls, at some of which I saw sermons and other works of divinity,
old editions of classics, and all such serious matters, while at stalls
and windows close beside them (and, possibly, at the same stalls) there
were books with title-pages displayed, indicating them to be of the most
indecent kind.

This is an atom: 
October 2d.--Yesterday forenoon I went with J----- into the city to 67
Grace Church Street, to get a bank post-note cashed by Mr. Oakford, and
afterwards to the offices of two lines of steamers, in Moorgate Street
and Leadenhall Street.  The city was very much thronged.  It is a marvel
what sets so many people a going at all hours of the day.  Then it is to
be considered that these are but a small portion of those who are doing
the business of the city; much the larger part being occupied in offices
at desks, in discussions of plans of enterprise, out of sight of the
public, while these earnest hurriers are merely the froth in the pot.

This is an atom: 
After seeing the steam-officials, we went to London Bridge, which always
swarms with more passengers than any of the streets.  Descending the
steps that lead to the level of the Thames, we took passage in a boat
bound up the river to Chelsea, of which there is one starting every ten
minutes, the voyage being of forty minutes' duration.  It began to
sprinkle a little just as we started; but after a slight showeriness,
lasting till we had passed Westminster Bridge, the day grew rather
pleasant.

This is an atom: 
At Westminster Bridge we had a good view of the river-front of the two
Houses of Parliament, which look very noble from this point,--a long and
massive extent, with a delightful promenade for the legislative people
exactly above the margin of the river.  This is certainly a magnificent
edifice, and yet I doubt whether it is so impressive as it might and
ought to have been made, considering its immensity.  It makes no more
impression than you can well account to yourself for, and you rather
wonder that it does not make more.  The reason must be that the architect
has not "builded better than he knew."  He felt no power higher and wiser
than himself, making him its instrument.  He reckoned upon and contrived
all his effects with malice aforethought, and therefore missed the
crowning glory,--that being a happiness which God, out of his pure grace,
mixes up with only the simple-hearted, best efforts of men.

This is an atom: 
October 3d.--I again went into the city yesterday forenoon, to settle
about the passages to Lisbon, taking J----- with me.  From Hungerford
Bridge we took the steamer to London Bridge, that being an easy and
speedy mode of accomplishing distances that take many footsteps through
the crowded thoroughfares.  After leaving the steamer-office, we went
back through the Strand, and, crossing Waterloo Bridge, walked a good way
on to the Surrey side of the river; a coarse, dingy, disagreeable suburb,
with shops apparently for country produce, for old clothes, second-hand
furniture, for ironware, and other things bulky and inelegant.  How many
scenes and sorts of life are comprehended within London!  There was much
in the aspect of these streets that reminded me of a busy country village
in America on an immensely magnified scale.

This is an atom: 
Growing rather weary anon, we got into an omnibus, which took us as far
as the Surrey Zoological Gardens, which J----- wished very much to see.
They proved to be a rather poor place of suburban amusement; poor, at
least, by daylight, their chief attraction for the public consisting in
out-of-door representations of battles and sieges.  The storming of
Sebastopol (as likewise at the Cremorne Gardens) was advertised for the
evening, and we saw the scenery of Sebastopol, painted on a vast scale,
in the open air, and really looking like miles and miles of hill and
water; with a space for the actual manoeuvring of ships on a sheet of
real water in front of the scene, on which some ducks were now swimming
about, in place of men-of-war.  The climate of England must often
interfere with this sort of performance; and I can conceive of nothing
drearier for spectators or performers than a drizzly evening.  Convenient
to this central spot of entertainment there were liquor and refreshment
rooms, with pies and cakes.  The menagerie, though the ostensible staple
of the gardens, is rather poor and scanty; pretty well provided with
lions and lionesses, also one or two giraffes, some camels, a polar
bear,--who plunged into a pool of water for bits of cake,--and two black
bears, who sat on their haunches or climbed poles; besides a wilderness
of monkeys, some parrots and macaws, an ostrich, various ducks, and other
animal and ornithological trumpery; some skins of snakes so well stuffed
that I took them for living serpents till J----- discovered the
deception, and an aquarium, with a good many common fishes swimming among
sea-weed.

This is an atom: 
The garden is shaded with trees, and set out with greensward and
gravel-walks, from which the people were sweeping the withered autumnal
leaves, which now fall every day.  Plaster statues stand here and there,
one of them without a head, thus disclosing the hollowness of the trunk;
there were one or two little drizzly fountains, with the water dripping
over the rock-work, of which the English are so fond; and the buildings
for the animals and other purposes had a flimsy, pasteboard aspect of
pretension.  The garden was in its undress; few visitors, I suppose,
coming hither at this time of day,--only here and there a lady and
children, a young man and girl, or a couple of citizens, loitering about.
I take pains to remember these small items, because they suggest the
day-life or torpidity of what may look very brilliant at night.  These
corked-up fountains, slovenly greensward, cracked casts of statues,
pasteboard castles, and duck-pond Bay of Balaclava then shining out in
magic splendor, and the shabby attendants whom we saw sweeping and
shovelling probably transformed into the heroes of Sebastopol.

This is an atom: 
J----- thought it a delightful place; but I soon grew very weary, and
came away about four o'clock, and, getting into a city omnibus, we
alighted on the hither side of Blackfriar's Bridge.  Turning into Fleet
Street, I looked about for a place to dine at, and chose the Mitre
Tavern, in memory of Johnson and Boswell.  It stands behind a front of
modern shops, through which is an archway, giving admittance into a
narrow court-yard, which, I suppose, was formerly open to Fleet Street.
The house is of dark brick, and, comparing it with other London edifices,
I should take it to have been at least refronted since Johnson's time;
but within, the low, sombre coffee-room which we entered might well
enough have been of that era or earlier.  It seems to be a good, plain,
respectable inn; and the waiter gave us each a plate of boiled beef, and,
for dessert, a damson tart, which made up a comfortable dinner.  After
dinner, we zigzagged homeward through Clifford's link passage, Holborn,
Drury Lane, the Strand, Charing Cross, Pall Mall, and Regent Street; but
I remember only an ancient brick gateway as particularly remarkable.  I
think it was the entrance to Lincoln's Inn.  We reached home at about
six.

This is an atom: 
There is a woman who has several times passed through this Hanover
Street, in which we live, stopping occasionally to sing songs under the
windows; and last evening, between nine and ten o'clock, she came and
sang "Kathleen O'Moore" richly and sweetly.  Her voice rose up out of the
dim, chill street, and made our hearts throb in unison with it as we sat
in our comfortable drawing-room.  I never heard a voice that touched me
more deeply.  Somebody told her to go away, and she stopped like a
nightingale suddenly shot; but, finding that S----- wished to know
something about her, Fanny and one of the maids ran after her, and
brought her into the hall.  It seems she was educated to sing at the
opera, and married an Italian opera-singer, who is now dead; lodging in a
model lodging-house at threepence a night, and being a penny short
to-night, she tried this method, in hope of getting this penny.  She
takes in plain sewing when she can get any, and picks up a trifle about
the street by means of her voice, which, she says, was once sweet, but
has now been injured by the poorness of her living.  She is a pale woman,
with black eyes, Fanny says, and may have been pretty once, but is not so
now.  It seems very strange, that with such a gift of Heaven, so
cultivated, too, as her voice is, making even an unsusceptible heart
vibrate like a harp-string, she should not have had an engagement among
the hundred theatres and singing-rooms of London; that she should throw
away her melody in the streets for the mere chance of a penury, when
sounds not a hundredth part so sweet are worth from other lips purses of
gold.

This is an atom: 
October 5th.--It rained almost all day on Wednesday, so that I did not go
out till late in the afternoon, and then only took a stroll along Oxford
Street and Holborn, and back through Fleet Street and the Strand.
Yesterday, at a little after ten, I went to the ambassador's to get my
wife's passport for Lisbon.  While I was talking with the clerk,
Mr. ------ made his appearance in a dressing-gown, with a morning
cheerfulness and alacrity in his manner.  He was going to Liverpool with
his niece, who returns to America by the steamer of Saturday.  She has
had a good deal of success in society here; being pretty enough to be
remarked among English women, and with cool, self-possessed, frank, and
quiet manners, which look very like the highest breeding.

This is an atom: 
I next went to Westminster Abbey, where I had long promised myself
another quiet visit; for I think I never could be weary of it; and when I
finally leave England, it will be this spot which I shall feel most
unwilling to quit forever.  I found a party going through the seven
chapels (or whatever their number may be), and again saw those stately
and quaint old tombs,--ladies and knights stretched out on marble slabs,
or beneath arches and canopies of stone, let into the walls of the Abbey,
reclining on their elbows, in ruff and farthingale or riveted armor, or
in robes of state, once painted in rich colors, of which only a few
patches of scarlet now remain; bearded faces of noble knights, whose
noses, in many cases, had been smitten off; and Mary, Queen of Scots, had
lost two fingers of her beautiful hands, which she is clasping in prayer.
There must formerly have been very free access to these tombs; for I
observed that all the statues (so far as I examined them) were scratched
with the initials of visitors, some of the names being dated above a
century ago.  The old coronation-chair, too, is quite covered, over the
back and seat, with initials cut into it with pocket-knives, just as
Yankees would do it; only it is not whittled away, as would have been its
fate in our hands.  Edward the Confessor's shrine, which is chiefly of
wood, likewise abounds in these inscriptions, although this was esteemed
the holiest shrine in England, so that pilgrims still come to kneel and
kiss it.  Our guide, a rubicund verger of cheerful demeanor, said that
this was true in a few instances.

This is an atom: 
There is a beautiful statue in memory of Horace Walpole's mother; and I
took it to be really a likeness, till the verger said that it was a copy
of a statue which her son had admired in Italy, and so had transferred it
to his mother's grave.  There is something characteristic in this mode of
filial duty and honor.  In all these chapels, full of the tombs and
effigies of kings, dukes, arch-prelates, and whatever is proud and
pompous in mortality, there is nothing that strikes me more than the
colossal statue of plain Mr. Watt, sitting quietly in a chair, in St.
Paul's Chapel, and reading some papers.  He dwarfs the warriors and
statesmen; and as to the kings, we smile at them.  Telford is in another
of the chapels.  This visit to the chapels was much more satisfactory
than my former one; although I in vain strove to feel it adequately, and
to make myself sensible how rich and venerable was what I saw.  This
realization must come at its own time, like the other happinesses of
life.  It is unaccountable that I could not now find the seat of Sir
George Downing's squire, though I examined particularly every seat on
that side of Henry VII's Chapel, where I before found it.  I must try
again. . . .

This is an atom: 
October 6th.--Yesterday was not an eventful day.  I took J----- with me
to the city, called on Mr. Sturgis at the Barings' House, and got his
checks for a bank post-note.  The house is at 8 Bishopsgate Street,
Within.  It has no sign of any kind, but stands back from the street,
behind an iron-grated fence.  The firm appears to occupy the whole
edifice, which is spacious, and fit for princely merchants.  Thence I
went and paid for the passages to Lisbon (32 pounds) at the Peninsular
Steam Company's office, and thence to call on General ------.  I forgot
to mention, that, first of all, I went to Mr. B------'s, whom I found
kind and vivacious as usual.  It now rained heavily, and, being still
showery when we came to Cheapside again, we first stood under an archway
(a usual resort for passengers through London streets), and then betook
ourselves to sanctuary, taking refuge in St. Paul's Cathedral.  The
afternoon service was about to begin, so, after looking at a few of the
monuments, we sat down in the choir, the richest and most ornamented part
of the cathedral, with screens or partitions of oak, cunningly carved.
Small white-robed choristers were flitting noiselessly about, making
preparations for the service, which by and by began.  It is a beautiful
idea, that, several times in the course of the day, a man can slip out of
the thickest throng and bustle of London into this religious atmosphere,
and hear the organ, and the music of young, pure voices; but, after all,
the rites are lifeless in our day.  We found, on emerging, that we had
escaped a very heavy shower, and it still sprinkled and misted as we went
homeward through Holborn and Oxford Street.

This is an atom: 
SOUTHAMPTON

This is an atom: 
October 11th.--We all left London on Sunday morning, between ten and
eleven, from the Waterloo station, and arrived in Southampton about two,
without meeting with anything very remarkable on the way.  We put up at
Chapple's Castle Hotel, which is one of the class styled "commercial,"
and, though respectable, not such a one as the nobility and gentry
usually frequent.  I saw little difference in the accommodation, except
that young women attended us instead of men,--a pleasant change.  It was
a showery day, but J----- and I walked out to see the shore and the town
and the docks, and, if possible, the ship in which S----- was to sail.
The most noteworthy object was the remains of an old castle, near the
water-side; the square, gray, weed grown, weird keep of which shows some
modern chimney-pots above its battlements, while remaining portions of
the fortress are made to seem as one of the walls for coal-depots, and
perhaps for small dwellings.  The English characteristically patch new
things into old things in this manner, materially, legally,
constitutionally, and morally.  Walking along the pier, we observed some
pieces of ordnance, one of which was a large brass cannon of Henry
VIII.'s time, about twelve feet long, and very finely made.  The bay of
Southampton presents a pleasant prospect, and I believe it is the great
rendezvous of the yacht-club.  Old and young seafaring people were
strolling about, and lounging at corners, just as they do on Sunday
afternoons in the minor seaports of America.

This is an atom: 
From the shore we went up into the town, which is handsome, and of a
cheerful aspect, with streets generally wide and well paved,--a cleanly
town, not smoke-begrimed.  The houses, if not modern, are, at least with
few exceptions, new fronted.  We saw one relic of antiquity,--a fine
mediaeval gateway across the principal street, much more elevated than
the gates of Chester, with battlements at the top, and a spacious
apartment over the great arch for the passage of carriages, and the
smaller one on each side for foot-passengers.  There were two statues in
armor or antique costume on the hither side of the gateway, and two old
paintings on the other.  This, so far as I know, is the only remnant of
the old wall of Southampton.

This is an atom: 
On Monday the morning was bright, alternating with a little showeriness.
U----, J-----, and I went into the town to do some shopping before the
steamer should sail; and a little after twelve we drove down to the dock.
The Madeira is a pleasant-looking ship enough, not very large, but
accommodating, I believe, about seventy passengers.  We looked at my
wife's little stateroom, with its three berths for herself and the two
children; and then sat down in the saloon, and afterwards on deck, to
spend the irksome and dreary hour or two before parting.  Many of the
passengers seemed to be Portuguese, undersized, dark, mustachioed people,
smoking cigars.  John Bull was fairly represented too. . . . U---- was
cheerful, and R----- seemed anxious to get off.  Poor Fanny was
altogether cast down, and shed tears, either from regret at leaving her
native land, or dread of sea-sickness, or general despondency, being a
person of no spring of spirits.  I waited till the captain came on board,
--a middle-aged or rather elderly man, with a sensible expression, but,
methought, with a hard, cold eye, to whom I introduced my wife,
recommending her to his especial care, as she was unattended by any
gentleman; and then we thought it best to cut short the parting scene.
So we bade one another farewell; and, leaving them on the deck of the
vessel, J----- and I returned to the hotel, and, after dining at the
table d'hote, drove down to the railway.  This is the first great
parting that we have ever had.

This is an atom: 
It was three o'clock when we left Southampton.  In order to get to
Worcester, where we were to spend the night, we strode, as it were, from
one line of railway to another, two or three times, and did not arrive at
our journey's end till long after dark.

This is an atom: 
At Worcester we put ourselves into the hands of a cabman, who drove us to
the Crown Hotel,--one of the old-fashioned hotels, with an entrance
through an arched passage, by which vehicles were admitted into the
inn-yard, which has also an exit, I believe, into another street.  On one
side of the arch was the coffee-room, where, after looking at our
sleeping-chambers on the other side of the arch, we had some cold
pigeon-pie for supper, and for myself a pint of ale.

This is an atom: 
It should be mentioned, that, in the morning, before embarking S----- and
the children on board the steamer, I saw a fragment of a rainbow among
the clouds, and remembered the old adage bidding "sailors take warning."
In the afternoon, as J----- and I were railing from Southampton, we saw
another fragmentary rainbow, which, by the same adage, should be the
"sailor's delight."  The weather has rather tended to confirm the first
omen, but the sea-captains tell me that the steamer must have gone beyond
the scope of these winds.

This is an atom: 
WORCESTER.

This is an atom: 
October 14th.---In the morning of Tuesday, after breakfast in the
coffee-room, J----- and I walked about to see the remarkables of
Worcester.  It is not a particularly interesting city, compared with
other old English cities; the general material of the houses being red
brick, and almost all modernized externally, whatever may be the age of
their original framework.  We saw a large brick jail in castellated
style, with battlements,--a very barren and dreary-looking edifice;
likewise, in the more central part of the town, a Guildhall with a
handsome front, ornamented with a statue of Queen Anne above the
entrance, and statues of Charles I. and Charles II. on either side of the
door, with the motto, "Floreat semper civitas fidelis."  Worcester seems
to pride itself upon its loyalty.  We entered the building, and in the
large interior hall saw some old armor hanging on the wall at one end,--
corselets, helmets, greaves, and a pair of breeches of chain mail.  An
inscription told us that these suits of armor had been left by Charles I.
after the battle of Worcester, and presented to the city at a much later
date by a gentleman of the neighborhood.  On the stone floor of the hall,
under the armor, were two brass cannon, one of which had been taken from
the French in a naval battle within the present century; the other was a
beautiful piece, bearing, I think, the date of 1632, and manufactured in
Brussels for the Count de Burgh, as a Latin inscription testified.  This
likewise was a relic of the battle of Worcester, where it had been lost
by Charles.  Many gentlemen--connected with the city government, I
suppose--were passing through the hall; and, looking through its interior
doors, we saw stately staircases and council-rooms panelled with oak or
other dark wood.  There seems to be a good deal of state in the
government of these old towns.

This is an atom: 
Worcester Cathedral would have impressed me much had I seen it earlier;
though its aspect is less venerable than that of Chester or Lichfield,
having been faithfully renewed and repaired, and stone-cutters and masons
were even now at work on the exterior.  At our first visit, we found no
entrance; but coming again at ten o'clock, when the service was to begin,
we found the door open, and the chorister-boys, in their white robes,
standing in the nave and aisles, with elder people in the same garb, and
a few black-robed ecclesiastics and an old verger.  The interior of the
cathedral has been covered with a light-colored paint at some recent
period.  There is, as I remember, very little stained glass to enrich and
bedim the light; and the effect produced is a naked, daylight aspect,
unlike what I have seen in any other Gothic cathedral.  The plan of the
edifice, too, is simple; a nave and side aisles, with great clustered
pillars, from which spring the intersecting arches; and, somehow or
other, the venerable mystery which I have found in Westminster Abbey and
elsewhere does not lurk in these arches and behind these pillars.  The
choir, no doubt, is richer and more beautiful; but we did not enter it.
I remember two tombs, with recumbent figures on there, between the
pillars that divide the nave from the side aisles, and there were also
mural monuments,--one, well executed, to an officer slain in the
Peninsular war, representing him falling from his horse; another by a
young widow to her husband, with an inscription of passionate grief, and
a record of her purpose finally to sleep beside him.  He died in 1803.  I
did not see on the monument any record of the consummation of her
purpose; and so perhaps she sleeps beside a second husband.  There are
more antique memorials than these two on the wall, and I should have been
interested to examine them; but the service was now about to begin in the
choir, and at the far-off end of the nave the old verger waved his hand
to banish us from the cathedral.  At the same time he moved towards us,
probably to say that he would show it to us after service; but having
little time, and being so moderately impressed with what I had already
seen, I took my departure, and so disappointed the old man of his
expected shilling or half-crown.  The tomb of King John is somewhere in
this cathedral.

This is an atom: 
We renewed our rambles through the town, and, passing the Museum of the
Worcester Natural History Society, I yielded to J-----'s wish to go in.
There are three days in the week, I believe, on which it is open to the
public; but this being one of the close days, we were admitted on payment
of a shilling.  It seemed a very good and well-arranged collection in
most departments of Natural History, and J-----, who takes more interest
in these matters than I do, was much delighted.  We were left to examine
the hall and galleries quite at our leisure.  Besides the specimens of
beasts, birds, shells, fishes, minerals, fossils, insects, and all other
natural things before the flood and since, there was a stone bearing a
Roman inscription, and various antiquities, coins, and medals, and
likewise portraits, some of which were old and curious.

This is an atom: 
Leaving the museum, we walked down to the stone bridge over the Severn,
which is here the largest river I have seen in England, except, of
course, the Mersey and the Thames.  A flight of steps leads from the
bridge down to a walk along the river-side, and this we followed till we
reached the spot where an angler was catching chubs and dace, under the
walls of the bishop's palace, which here faces the river.  It seems to be
an old building, but with modern repairs and improvements.  The angler
had pretty good success while we were looking at him, drawing out two or
three silvery fish, and depositing them in his basket, which was already
more than half full.  The Severn is not a transparent stream, and looks
sluggish, but has really movement enough to carry the angler's float
along pretty fast.  There were two vessels of considerable size (that is,
as large as small schooners) lying at the bridge.  We now passed under an
old stone archway, through a lane that led us from the river-side up past
the cathedral, whence a gentleman and lady were just emerging, and the
verger was closing the door behind them.

This is an atom: 
We returned to our hotel, and ordered luncheon,--some cold chicken, cold
ham, and ale, and after paying the bill (about fifteen shillings, to
which I added five shillings for attendance) we took our departure in a
fly for the railway.  The waiter (a young woman), chambermaid, and boots,
all favored us with the most benign and deferential looks at parting,
whence it was easy to see that I had given them more than they had any
claim to receive.  Nevertheless, this English system of fees has its good
side, and I never travel without finding the advantage of it, especially
on railways, where the officials are strictly forbidden to take fees, and
where, in consequence, a fee secures twice as much good service as
anywhere else.  Be it recorded, that I never knew an Englishman to refuse
a shilling,--or, for that matter, a halfpenny.

This is an atom: 
From Worcester we took tickets to Wolverhampton, and thence to
Birkenhead.  It grew dark before we reached Chester, and began to rain;
and when we got to Birkenhead it was a pitiless, pelting storm, under
which, on the deck of the steamboat, we crossed the detestable Mersey,
two years' trial of which has made me detest it every day more and more.
It being the night of rejoicing for the taking of Sebastopol and the
visit of the Duke of Cambridge, we found it very difficult to get a cab
on the Liverpool side; but after much waiting in the rain, and afterwards
in one of the refreshment-rooms, on the landing stage, we took a Hansom
and drove off.  The cloudy sky reflected the illuminations, and we saw
some gas-lighted stars and other devices, as we passed, very pretty, but
much marred by the wind and rain.  So we finally arrived at Mrs.
Blodgett's, and made a good supper of ham and cold chicken, like our
luncheon, after which, wet as we were, and drizzling as the weather was,
and though it was two hours beyond his bedtime, I took J----- out to see
the illuminations.  I wonder what his mother would have said.  But the
boy must now begin to see life and to feel it.

This is an atom: 
There was a crowd of people in the street; such a crowd that we could
hardly make a passage through them, and so many cabs and omnibuses that
it was difficult to cross the ways.  Some of the illuminations were very
brilliant; but there was a woful lack of variety and invention in the
devices.  The star of the garter, which kept flashing out from the
continual extinguishment of the wind and rain,--V and A, in capital
letters of light,--were repeated a hundred times; as were loyal and
patriotic mottoes,--crowns formed by colored lamps.  In some instances a
sensible tradesman had illuminated his own sign, thereby at once
advertising his loyalty and his business.  Innumerable flags were
suspended before the houses and across the streets, and the crowd plodded
on, silent, heavy, and without any demonstration of joy, unless by the
discharge of pistols close at one's ear.  The rain, to be sure, was quite
sufficient to damp any joyous ebullition of feeling; but the next day,
when the rain had ceased, and when the streets were still thronged with
people, there was the same heavy, purposeless strolling from place to
place, with no more alacrity of spirit than while it rained.  The English
do not know how to rejoice; and, in their present circumstances, to say
the truth, have not much to rejoice for.  We soon came home; but I
believe it was nearly, if not quite, eleven.

This is an atom: 
At Mrs. Blodgett's, Mr. Archer (surgeon to some prison or house of
correction here in Liverpool) spoke of an attorney who many years ago
committed forgery, and, being apprehended, took a dose of prussic acid.
Mr. Archer came with the stomach-pump, and asked the patient how much
prussic acid he had taken.  "Sir," he replied, attorney-like, "I decline
answering that question!"  He recovered, and afterwards arrived at great
wealth in New South Wales.

This is an atom: 
November 14th.--At dinner at Mr. Bright's, a week or two ago, Mr.
Robertson Gladstone spoke of a magistrate of Liverpool, many years since,
Sir John ------.  Of a morning, sitting on the bench in the police court,
he would take five shillings out of his pocket and say, "Here, Mr. Clerk,
so much for my fine.  I was drunk last night!"  Mr. Gladstone witnessed
this personally.

This is an atom: 
November 16th.--I went to the North Hospital yesterday, to take the
deposition of a dying man as to his ill treatment by the second and third
mates of the ship Assyria, on the voyage from New Orleans.  This hospital
is a very gloomy place, with its wide bleak entries and staircases, which
may be very good for summer weather, but which are most congenial at this
bleak November season.  I found the physicians of the house laughing and
talking very cheerfully with Mr. Wilding, who had preceded me.  We went
forthwith, up two or three pairs of stairs, to the ward where the sick
man lay, and where there were six or eight other beds, in almost each of
which was a patient,--narrow beds, shabbily furnished.  The man whom I
came to see was the only one who was not perfectly quiet; neither was he
very restless.  The doctor, informing him of my presence, intimated that
his disease might be lethal, and that I was come to hear what he had to
say as to the causes of his death.  Afterwards, a Testament was sought
for, in order to swear him, and I administered the oath, and made him
kiss the book.  He then (in response to Mr. Wilding's questions) told how
he had been beaten and ill-treated, hanged and thwacked, from the moment
he came on board, to which usage he ascribed his death.  Sometimes his
senses seemed to sink away, so that I almost thought him dead; but by and
by the questions would appear to reach him, and bring him back, and he
went on with his evidence, interspersing it, however, with dying groans,
and almost death rattles.  In the midst of whatever he was saying, he
often recurred to a sum of four dollars and a half, which he said he had
put into the hands of the porter of the hospital, and which he wanted to
get back.  Several times he expressed his wish to return to America (of
which he was not a native), and, on the whole, I do not think he had any
real sense of his precarious condition, notwithstanding that he assented
to the doctor's hint to that effect.  He sank away so much at one time,
that they brought him wine in a tin cup, with a spout to drink out of,
and he mustered strength to raise himself in his bed and drink; then
hemmed, with rather a disappointed air, as if it did not stimulate and
refresh him, as drink ought to do.  When he had finished his evidence
(which Mr. Wilding took down in writing from his mouth), he marked his
cross at the foot of the paper, and we ceased to torment him with further
question.  His deposition will probably do no good, so far as the
punishment of the persons implicated is concerned; for he appears to have
come on board in a sickly state, and never to have been well during the
passage.  On a pallet, close by his bed, lay another seaman of the same
ship, who had likewise been abused by the same men, and bore more
ostensible marks of ill usage than this man did, about the head and face.
There is a most dreadful state of things aboard our ships.  Hell itself
can be no worse than some of them, and I do pray that some New-Englander
with the rage of reform in him may turn his thoughts this way.  The
first step towards better things--the best practicable step for the
present--is to legalize flogging on shipboard; thereby doing away with
the miscellaneous assaults and batteries, kickings, fisticuffings,
ropes'-endings, marline-spikings, which the inferior officers continually
perpetrate, as the only mode of keeping up anything like discipline.  As
in many other instances, philanthropy has overshot itself by the
prohibition of flogging, causing the captain to avoid the responsibility
of solemn punishment, and leave his mates to make devils of themselves,
by habitual and hardly avoidable ill treatment of the seamen.

This is an atom: 
After I left the dying sailor, his features seemed to contract and grow
sharp.  Some young medical students stood about the bed, watching death
creep upon him, and anticipating, perhaps, that in a day or two they
would have the poor fellow's body on the dissecting-table.  Dead
patients, I believe, undergo this fate, unless somebody chooses to pay
their funeral expenses; but the captain of the Assyria (who seems to be
respectable and kind-hearted, though master of a floating hell) tells me
that he means to bury the man at his own cost.  This morning there is a
note from the surgeon of the hospital, announcing his death, and likewise
the dangerous state of his shipmate whom I saw on the pallet beside him.

This is an atom: 
Sea-captains call a dress-coat a "claw-hammer."

This is an atom: 
November 22d.--I went on board the ship William Lapscott, lying in the
river, yesterday, to take depositions in reference to a homicide
committed in New York.  I sat on a sofa in the cabin, and Mr. Wilding at
a table, with his writing-materials before him, and the crew were
summoned, one by one,--rough, piratical-looking fellows, contrasting
strongly with the gewgaw cabin in which I received them.  There is no
such finery on land as in the cabin of one of these ships in the
Liverpool trade, finished off with a complete panelling of rosewood,
mahogany, and bird's-eye maple, polished and varnished, and gilded along
the cornices and the edges of the panels.  It is all a piece of elaborate
cabinet-work; and one does not altogether see why it should be given to
the gales, and the salt-sea atmosphere, to be tossed upon the waves, and
occupied by a rude shipmaster in his dreadnaught clothes, when the
fairest lady in the land has no such boudoir.  A telltale compass hung
beneath the skylight, and a clock was fastened near it, and ticked
loudly.  A stewardess, with the aspect of a woman at home, went in and
out of the cabin, about her domestic calls.  Through the cabin door (it
being a house on deck) I could see the arrangement of the ship.

This is an atom: 
The first sailor that I examined was a black-haired, powerful fellow, in
an oil-skin jacket, with a good face enough, though he, too, might have
been taken for a pirate.  In the affray in which the homicide occurred,
he had received a cut across the forehead, and another slantwise across
his nose, which had quite cut it in two, on a level with the face, and
had thence gone downward to his lower jaw.  But neither he nor any one
else could give any testimony elucidating the matter into which I had
come to inquire.  A seaman had been stabbed just before the vessel left
New York, and had been sent on shore and died there.  Most of these men
were in the affray, and all of then were within a few yards of the spot
where it occurred; but those actually present all pleaded that they were
so drunk that the whole thing was now like a dream, with no distinct
images; and, if any had been sober, they took care to know nothing that
could inculpate any individual.  Perhaps they spoke truth; they certainly
had a free and honest-like way of giving their evidence, as if their only
object was to tell all the truth they knew.  But I rather think, in the
forecastle, and during the night-watches, they have whispered to one
another a great deal more than they told me, and have come to a pretty
accurate conclusion as to the man who gave the stab.

This is an atom: 
While the examination proceeded, there was a drawing of corks in a side
closet; and, at its conclusion, the captain asked us to stay to dinner,
but we excused ourselves, and drank only a glass of wine.  The captain
apologized for not joining us, inasmuch as he had drunk no wine for the
last seventeen years.  He appears to be a particularly good and
trustworthy man, and is the only shipmaster whom I have met with, who
says that a crew can best be governed by kindness.  In the inner closet
there was a cage containing two land-birds, who had come aboard him,
tired almost to death, three or four hundred miles from shore; and he had
fed them and been tender of them, from a sense of what was due to
hospitality.  He means to give them to J-----.

This is an atom: 
November 28th.--I have grown wofully aristocratic in my tastes, I fear,
since coming to England; at all events, I am conscious of a certain
disgust at going to dine in a house with a small entrance-hall and a
narrow staircase, parlor with chintz curtains, and all other arrangements
on a similar scale.  This is pitiable.  However, I really do not think I
should mind these things, were it not for the bustle, the affectation,
the intensity, of the mistress of the house.  It is certain that a woman
in England is either decidedly a lady or decidedly not a lady.  There
seems to be no respectable medium.  Bill of fare: broiled soles, half of
a roast pig, a haricot of mutton, stewed oysters, a tart, pears, figs,
with sherry and port wine, both good, and the port particularly so.  I
ate some pig, and could hardly resist the lady's importunities to eat
more; though to my fancy it tasted of swill,--had a flavor of the pigsty.
On the parlor table were some poor editions of popular books,
Longfellow's poems and others.  The lady affects a literary taste, and
bothered me about my own productions.

This is an atom: 
A beautiful subject for a romance, or for a sermon, would be the
subsequent life of the young man whom Jesus bade to sell all he had and
give to the poor; and he went away sorrowful, and is not recorded to have
done what he was bid.

This is an atom: 
December 11th.--This has been a foggy morning and forenoon, snowing a
little now and then, and disagreeably cold.  The sky is of an
inexpressibly dreary, dun color.  It is so dark at times that I have to
hold my book close to my eyes, and then again it lightens up a little.
On the whole, disgustingly gloomy; and thus it has been for a long while
past, although the disagreeableness seems to be very near the earth, and
just above the steeples and house-tops very probably there may be a
bright, sunshiny day.  At about twelve there is a faint glow of sunlight,
like the gleaming reflection from a not highly polished copper kettle.

This is an atom: 
December 26th.--On Christmas eve and yesterday, there were little
branches of mistletoe hanging in several parts of the house, in the
kitchen, the entries, the parlor, and the smoking-room,--suspended from
the gas-fittings.  The maids of the house did their utmost to entrap the
gentlemen boarders, old and young; under the privileged places, and there
to kiss them, after which they were expected to pay a shilling.  It is
very queer, being customarily so respectful, that they should assume this
license now, absolutely trying to pull the gentlemen into the kitchen by
main force, and kissing the harder and more abundantly the more they were
resisted.  A little rosy-checked Scotch lass--at other times very modest
--was the most active in this business.  I doubt whether any gentleman
but myself escaped.  I heard old Mr. S------ parleying with the maids
last evening, and pleading his age; but he seems to have met with no
mercy, for there was a sound of prodigious smacking immediately
afterwards.  J----- was assaulted, and fought, most vigorously; but was
outrageously kissed,--receiving some scratches, moreover, in the
conflict.  The mistletoe has white, wax-looking berries, and dull green
leaves, with a parasitical stem.

This is an atom: 
Early in the morning of Christmas day, long before daylight, I heard
music in the street, and a woman's voice, powerful and melodious, singing
a Christmas hymn.  Before bedtime I presume one half of England, at a
moderate calculation, was the worse for liquor.

This is an atom: 
The market-houses, at this season, show the national taste for heavy
feeding,--carcasses of prize oxen, immensely fat, and bulky; fat sheep,
with their woolly heads and tails still on, and stars and other devices
ingeniously wrought on the quarters; fat pigs, adorned with flowers, like
corpses of virgins; hares, wild-fowl, geese, ducks, turkeys; and green
boughs and banners suspended about the stalls,--and a great deal of dirt
and griminess on the stone floor of the market-house, and on the persons
of the crowd.

This is an atom: 
There are some Englishmen whom I like,--one or two for whom I might say I
have an affection; but still there is not the same union between us as if
they were Americans.  A cold, thin medium intervenes betwixt our most
intimate approaches.  It puts me in mind of Alnaschar and his princess,
with the cold steel blade of his scimitar between them.  Perhaps if I
were at home I might feel differently; but in a foreign land I can never
forget the distinction between English and American.

This is an atom: 
January 1st, 1856.--Last night, at Mrs. Blodgett's, we sat up till twelve
o'clock to open the front door, and let the New Year in.  After the
coming guest was fairly in the house, the back door was to be opened, to
let the Old Year out; but I was tired, and did not wait for the latter
ceremony.  When the New Year made its entrance, there was a general
shaking of hands, and one of the shipmasters said that it was customary
to kiss the ladies all round; but to my great satisfaction, we did not
proceed to such extremity.  There was singing in the streets, and many
voices of people passing, and when twelve had struck, all the bells of
the town, I believe, rang out together.  I went up stairs, sad and
lonely, and, stepping into J-----'s little room, wished him a Happy New
Year, as he slept, and many of them.

This is an atom: 
To a cool observer, a country does not show to best advantage during a
time of war.  All its self-conceit is doubly visible, and, indeed, is
sedulously kept uppermost by direct appeals to it.  The country must be
humbugged, in order to keep its courage up.

This is an atom: 
Sentiment seems to me more abundant in middle-aged ladies in England than
in the United States.  I don't know how it may be with young ladies.

This is an atom: 
The shipmasters bear testimony to the singular delicacy of common sailors
in their behavior in the presence of women; and they say that this good
trait is still strongly observable even in the present race of seamen,
greatly deteriorated as it is.  On shipboard, there is never an
indecorous word or unseemly act said or done by sailors when a woman can
be cognizant of it; and their deportment in this respect differs greatly
from that of landsmen of similar position in society.  This is
remarkable, considering that a sailor's female acquaintances are usually
and exclusively of the worst kind, and that his intercourse with them has
no relation whatever to morality or decency.  For this very reason, I
suppose, he regards a modest woman as a creature divine and to be
reverenced.

This is an atom: 
January 16th.---I have suffered wofully from low spirits for some time
past; and this has not often been the case since I grew to be a man, even
in the least auspicious periods of my life.  My desolate bachelor
condition, I suppose, is the cause.  Really, I have no pleasure in
anything, and I feel my tread to be heavier, and my physical movement
more sluggish, than in happier times.  A weight is always upon me.  My
appetite is not good.  I sleep ill, lying awake till late at night, to
think sad thoughts and to imagine sombre things, and awaking before light
with the same thoughts and fancies still in my mind.  My heart sinks
always as I ascend the stairs to my office, from a dim augury of ill news
from Lisbon that I may perhaps hear,--of black-sealed letters, or some
such horrors.  Nothing gives me any joy.  I have learned what the
bitterness of exile is, in these days; and I never should have known it
but for the absence of "Remote, unfriended, melancholy, slow,"--I can
perfectly appreciate that line of Goldsmith; for it well expresses my own
torpid, unenterprising, joyless state of mind and heart.  I am like an
uprooted plant, wilted and drooping.  Life seems so purposeless as not to
be worth the trouble of carrying it on any further.

This is an atom: 
I was at a dinner, the other evening, at Mr. B------'s, where the
entertainment was almost entirely American,--New York oysters, raw,
stewed, and fried; soup of American partridges, particularly good; also
terrapin soup, rich, but not to my taste; American pork and beans, baked
in Yankee style; a noble American turkey, weighing thirty-one pounds;
and, at the other end of the table, an American round of beef, which the
Englishmen present allowed to be delicious, and worth a guinea an ounce.
I forget the other American dishes, if there were any more,--O yes!
canvas-back ducks, coming on with the sweets, in the usual English
fashion.  We ought to have had Catawba wine; but this was wanting,
although there was plenty of hock, champagne, sherry, madeira, port, and
claret.  Our host is a very jolly man, and the dinner was a merrier and
noisier one than any English dinner within my experience.

This is an atom: 
February 8th.--I read to-day, in the little office-Bible (greasy with
perjuries) St. Luke's account of the agony, the trial, the crucifixion,
and the resurrection; and how Christ appeared to the two disciples, on
their way to Emmaus, and afterwards to a company of disciples.  On both
these latter occasions he expounded the Scriptures to them, and showed
the application of the old prophecies to himself; and it is to be
supposed that he made them fully, or at least sufficiently, aware what
his character was,--whether God, or man, or both, or something between,
together with all other essential points of doctrine.  But none of this
doctrine or of these expositions is recorded, the mere facts being most
simply stated, and the conclusion to which he led them, that, whether God
himself, or the Son of God, or merely the Son of man, he was, at all
events, the Christ foretold in the Jewish Scriptures.  This last,
therefore, must have been the one essential point.

This is an atom: 
February 18th.--On Saturday there called on me an elderly Robinson-Crusoe
sort of man, Mr. H------, shipwright, I believe, of Boston, who has
lately been travelling in the East.  About a year ago he was here, after
being shipwrecked on the Dutch coast, and I assisted him to get home.
Again, I have supplied him with five pounds, and my credit for an outside
garment.  He is a spare man, with closely cropped gray, or rather white
hair, close-cropped whiskers fringing round his chin, and a close-cropped
white mustache, with his under lip and a portion of his chin bare
beneath,--sunburnt and weather-worn.  He has been in Syria and Jerusalem,
through the Desert, and at Sebastopol; and says he means to get Ticknor
to publish his travels, and the story of his whole adventurous life, on
his return home.  A free-spoken, confiding, hardy, religious, unpolished,
simple, yet world-experienced man; very talkative, and boring me with
longer visits than I like.  He has brought home, among other curiosities,
"a lady's arm," as he calls it, two thousand years old,--a piece of a
mummy, of course; also some coins, one of which, a gold coin of
Vespasian, he showed me, and said he bought it of an Arab of the desert.
The Bedouins possess a good many of these coins, handed down immemorially
from father to son, and never sell them unless compelled by want.  He had
likewise a Hebrew manuscript of the Book of Ruth, on a parchment roll,
which was put into his care to be given to Lord Haddo.

This is an atom: 
He was at Sebastopol during the siege, and nearly got his head knocked
off by a cannon-ball.  His strangest statement is one in reference to
Lord Raglan.  He says that an English officer told him that his Lordship
shut himself up, desiring not to be disturbed, as he needed sleep.  When
fifteen hours had gone by, his attendants thought it time to break open
the door; and Lord Raglan was found dead, with a bottle of strychnine by
the bedside.  The affair, so far as the circumstances indicated suicide,
was hushed up, and his death represented as a natural one.  The English
officer seems to have been an unscrupulous fellow, jesting thus with the
fresh memory of his dead commander; for it is impossible to believe a
word of the story.  Even if Lord Raglan had wished for death, he would
hardly have taken strychnine, when there were so many chances of being
honorably shot.  In Wood's Narrative of the Campaign, it is stated that
he died surrounded by the members of his staff, after having been for
some time ill.  It appears, however, by the same statement, that no
serious apprehensions had been entertained, until, one afternoon, he shut
himself in, desiring not to be disturbed till evening.  After two or
three hours he called Lord Burghersh,--"Frank, Frank!" and was found to
be almost in a state of collapse, and died that evening.  Mr. H------'s
story might very well have been a camp rumor.

This is an atom: 
It seems to me that the British Ministry, in its notion of a
life-peerage, shows an entire misunderstanding of what makes people
desire the peerage.  It is not for the immediate personal distinction;
but because it removes the peer and his consanguinity from the common
rank of men, and makes a separate order of them, as if they should grow
angelic.  A life-peer is but a mortal amid the angelic throng.

This is an atom: 
February 28th.--I went yesterday with Mrs. ------ and another lady, and
Mr. M------, to the West Derby Workhouse. . . .

This is an atom: 
[Here comes in the visit to the West Derby Workhouse, which was made the
subject of a paper in Our Old Home, called "Outside Glimpses of English
Poverty."  As the purpose in publishing these passages from the private
note-books is to give to those who ask for a memoir of Mr. Hawthorne
every possible incident recorded by himself which shows his character and
nature, the editor thinks it proper to disclose the fact that Mr.
Hawthorne was himself the gentleman of that party who took up in his arms
the little child, so fearfully repulsive in its condition.  And it seems
better to quote his own words in reference to it, than merely to say it
was he.

This is an atom: 
Under date February 28, 1856.

This is an atom: 
"After this, we went to the ward where the children were kept, and, on
entering this, we saw, in the first place, two or three unlovely and
unwholesome little imps, who were lazily playing together.  One of them
(a child about six years old, but I know not whether girl or boy)
immediately took the strangest fancy for me.  It was a wretched, pale,
half-torpid little thing, with a humor in its eyes which the Governor
said was the scurvy.  I never saw, till a few moments afterwards, a child
that I should feel less inclined to fondle.

This is an atom: 
"But this little, sickly, humor-eaten fright prowled around me, taking
hold of my skirts, following at my heels, and at last held up its hands,
smiled in my face, and, standing directly before me, insisted on my
taking it up!  Not that it said a word, for I rather think it was
underwitted, and could not talk; but its face expressed such perfect
confidence that it was going to be taken up and made much of, that it was
impossible not to do it.  It was as if God had promised the child this
favor on my behalf, and that I must needs fulfil the contract.  I held my
undesirable burden a little while; and, after setting the child down, it
still followed me, holding two of my fingers and playing with them, just
as if it were a child of my own.  It was a foundling, and out of all
human kind it chose me to be its father!  We went up stairs into another
ward; and, on coming down again, there was this same child waiting for
me, with a sickly smile round its defaced mouth, and in its dim red
eyes. . . . I never should have forgiven myself if I had repelled its
advances."--ED.]

This is an atom: 
After leaving the workhouse, we drove to Norris Green; and Mrs. ------
showed me round the grounds, which are very good and nicely kept.  O
these English homes, what delightful places they are!  I wonder how many
people live and die in the workhouse, having no other home, because other
people have a great deal more home than enough. . . . We had a very
pleasant dinner, and Mr. M------ and I walked back, four miles and a
half, to Liverpool, where we arrived just before midnight.

This is an atom: 
Why did Christ curse the fig-tree?  It was not in the least to blame; and
it seems most unreasonable to have expected it to bear figs out of
season.  Instead of withering it away, it would have been as great a
miracle, and far more beautiful, and, one would think, of more beneficent
influence, to have made it suddenly rich with ripe fruit.  Then, to be
sure, it might have died joyfully, having answered so good a purpose.  I
have been reminded of this miracle by the story of a man in Heywood, a
town in Lancashire, who used such horribly profane language that a
plane-tree in front of his cottage is said to have withered away from
that hour.  I can draw no moral from the incident of the fig-tree, unless
it be that all things perish from the instant when they cease to answer
some divine purpose.

This is an atom: 
March 6th.--Yesterday I lunched on board Captain Russell's ship, the
Princeton.  These daily lunches on shipboard might answer very well the
purposes of a dinner; being, in fact, noontide dinners, with soup, roast
mutton, mutton-chops, and a macaroni pudding,--brandy, port and sherry
wines.  There were three elderly Englishmen at table, with white heads,
which, I think, is oftener the predicament of elderly heads here than in
America.  One of these was a retired Custom-House officer, and the other
two were connected with shipping in some way.  There is a satisfaction in
seeing Englishmen eat and drink, they do it so heartily, and, on the
whole, so wisely,--trusting so entirely that there is no harm in good
beef and mutton, and a reasonable quantity of good liquor; and these
three hale old men, who had acted on this wholesome faith for so long,
were proofs that it is well on earth to live like earthly creatures.  In
America, what squeamishness, what delicacy, what stomachic apprehension,
would there not be among three stomachs of sixty or seventy years'
experience!  I think this failure of American stomachs is partly owing to
our ill usage of our digestive powers, and partly to our want of faith in
them.

This is an atom: 
After lunch, we all got into an omnibus, and went to the Mersey Iron
Foundry, to see the biggest piece of ordnance in the world, which is
almost finished.  The overseer of the works received us, and escorted us
courteously throughout the establishment; which is very extensive, giving
employment to a thousand men, what with night-work and day-work.  The big
gun is still on the axle, or turning-machine, by means of which it has
been bored.  It is made entirely of wrought and welded iron, fifty tons
of which were originally used; and the gun, in its present state, bored
out and smoothed away, weighs nearly twenty-three tons.  It has, as yet,
no trunnions, and does not look much like a cannon, but only a huge iron
cylinder, immensely solid, and with a bore so large that a young man of
nineteen shoved himself into it, the whole length, with a light, in order
to see whether it is duly smooth and regular.  I suppose it will have a
better effect, as to the impression of size, when it is finished,
polished, mounted, aid fully equipped, after the fashion of ordinary
cannon.  It is to throw a ball of three hundred pounds' weight five
miles, and woe be to whatever ship or battlement shall bear the brunt!

This is an atom: 
After inspecting the gun we went through other portions of the
establishment, and saw iron in various stages of manufacture.  I am not
usually interested in manufacturing processes, being quite unable to
understand them, at least in cotton-machinery and the like; but here
there were such exhibitions of mighty strength, both of men and machines,
that I had a satisfaction in looking on.  We saw lumps of iron, intensely
white-hot, and in all but a melting state, passed through rollers of
various size and pressure, and speedily converted into long bars, which
came curling and waving out of the rollers like great red ribbons, or
like fiery serpents wriggling out of Tophet; and finally, being
straightened out, they were laid to cool in heaps.  Trip-hammers are very
pleasant things to look at, working so massively as they do, and yet so
accurately; chewing up the hot iron, as it were, and fashioning it into
shape, with a sort of mighty and gigantic gentleness in their mode of
action.  What great things man has contrived, and is continually
performing!  What a noble brute he is!

This is an atom: 
Also, I found much delight in looking at the molten iron, boiling and
bubbling in the furnace, and sometimes slopping over, when stirred by the
attendant.  There were numberless fires on all sides, blinding us with
their intense glow; and continually the pounding strokes of huge hammers,
some wielded by machinery and others by human arms.  I had a respect for
these stalwart workmen, who seemed to be near kindred of the machines
amid which they wrought,--mighty men, smiting stoutly, and looking into
the fierce eyes of the furnace fearlessly, and handling the iron at a
temperature which would have taken the skin off from ordinary fingers.
They looked strong, indeed, but pale; for the hot atmosphere in which
they live cannot but be deleterious, and I suppose their very strength
wears them quickly out.  But I would rather live ten years as an
iron-smith than fifty as a tailor.

This is an atom: 
So much heat can be concentrated into a mass of iron, that a lump a foot
square heats all the atmosphere about it, and burns the face at a
considerable distance.  As the trip-hammer strikes the lump, it seems
still more to intensify the heat by squeezing it together, and the fluid
iron oozes out like sap or juice.

This is an atom: 
"He was ready for the newest fashions!"--this expression was used by Mrs.
Blodgett in reference to Mr. ------ on his first arrival in England, and
it is a very tender way of signifying that a person is rather poorly off
as to apparel.

This is an atom: 
March 15th.--Mr. ------, our new ambassador, arrived on Thursday
afternoon by the Atlantic, and I called at the Adelphi Hotel, after
dinner, to pay him my respects.  I found him and his family at
supper. . . . They seem to be plain, affable people. . . . The
ambassador is a venerable old gentleman, with a full head of perfectly
white hair, looking not unlike an old-fashioned wig; and this, together
with his collarless white neckcloth and his brown coat, gave him
precisely such an aspect as one would expect in a respectable person of
pre-revolutionary days.  There was a formal simplicity, too, in his
manners, that might have belonged to the same era.  He must have been a
very handsome man in his youthful days, and is now comely, very erect,
moderately tall, not overburdened with flesh; of benign and agreeable
address, with a pleasant smile; but his eyes, which are not very large,
impressed me as sharp and cold.  He did not at all stamp himself upon me
as a man of much intellectual or characteristic vigor.  I found no such
matter in his conversation, nor did I feel it in the indefinable way by
which strength always makes itself acknowledged.  B------, though,
somehow, plain and uncouth, yet vindicates himself as a large man of the
world, able, experienced, fit to handle difficult circumstances of life;
dignified, too, and able to hold his own in any society.  Mr. ------ has
a kind of venerable dignity; but yet, if a person could so little respect
himself as to insult him, I should say that there was no innate force in
Mr. ------ to prevent it.  It is very strange that he should have made so
considerable a figure in public life, filling offices that the strongest
men would have thought worthy of their highest ambition.  There must be
something shrewd and sly under his apparent simplicity; narrow, cold,
selfish, perhaps.  I fancied these things in his eyes.  He has risen in
life by the lack of too powerful qualities, and by a certain tact, which
enables him to take advantage of circumstances and opportunities, and
avail himself of his unobjectionableness, just at the proper time.  I
suppose he must be pronounced a humbug, yet almost or quite an innocent
one.  Yet he is a queer representative to be sent from brawling and
boisterous America at such a critical period.  It will be funny if
England sends him back again, on hearing the news of ------'s dismissal.
Mr. ------ gives me the impression of being a very amiable man in his own
family.  He has brought his son with him, as Secretary of Legation,--a
small young man, with a little mustache.  It will be a feeble embassy.

This is an atom: 
I called again the next morning, and introduced Mrs. ------, who, I
believe, accompanied the ladies about town.  This simplicity in
Mr. ------'s manner puzzles and teases me; for, in spite of it, there was
a sort of self-consciousness, as if he were being looked at,--as if he
were having his portrait taken.

This is an atom: 
LONDON.

This is an atom: 
March 22d.--Yesterday,--no, day before yesterday,--I left Liverpool for
London by rail, from the Lime Street station.  The journey was a dull and
monotonous one, as usual.  Three passengers were in the same carriage
with me at starting; but they dropped off; and from Rugby I was alone.
We reached London after ten o'clock; and I took a cab for St. James's
Place, No.  32, where I found Mr. B------ expecting me.  He had secured a
bedroom for me at this lodging-house, and I am to be free of his
drawing-room during my stay.  We breakfasted at nine, and then walked
down to his counting-room, in Old Broad Street, in the city.  It being a
dim, dingy morning, London looked very dull, the more so as it was Good
Friday, and therefore the streets were comparatively thin of people and
vehicles, and had on their Sunday aspect.  If it were not for the human
life and bustle of London, it would be a very stupid place, with a heavy
and dreary-monotony of unpicturesque streets.  We went up Bolt Court,
where Dr. Johnson used to live; and this was the only interesting site we
saw.  After spending some time in the counting-room, while Mr. ------
read his letters, we went to London Bridge, and took the steamer for
Waterloo Bridge, with partly an intent to go to Richmond, but the day was
so damp and dusky that we concluded otherwise.  So we came home,
visiting, on our way, the site of Covent Garden Theatre, lately burnt
down.  The exterior walls still remain perfect, and look quite solid
enough to admit of the interior being renewed, but I believe it is
determined to take them down.

This is an atom: 
After a slight lunch and a glass of wine, we walked out, along
Piccadilly, and to Hyde Park, which already looks very green, and where
there were a good many people walking and driving, and rosy-faced
children at play.  Somehow or other the shine and charm are gone from
London, since my last visit; and I did not very much admire, nor feel
much interested in anything.  We returned (and I, for my part, was much
wearied) in time for dinner at five.  The evening was spent at home in
various talk, and I find Mr. ------ a very agreeable companion, and a
young man of thought and information, with a self-respecting character,
and I think him a safe person to live with.

This is an atom: 
This St. James's Place is in close vicinity to St. James's Palace, the
gateway and not very splendid front of which we can see from the corner.
The club-houses and the best life of the town are near at hand.  Addison,
before his marriage, used to live in St. James's Place, and the house
where Mr. Rogers recently died is up the court, not that this latter
residence excites much interest in my mind.  I remember nothing else very
noteworthy in this first day's experience, except that on Sir Watkins
Williams Wynn's door, not far from this house, I saw a gold knocker,
which is said to be unscrewed every night lest it should be stolen.  I
don't know whether it be really gold; for it did not look so bright as
the generality of brass ones.  I received a very good letter from J-----
this morning.  He was to go to Mr. Bright's at Sandhays yesterday, and
remain till Monday.

This is an atom: 
After writing the above, I walked along the Strand, Fleet Street, Ludgate
Hill and Cheapside to Wood Street,--a very narrow street, insomuch that
one has to press close against the wall to escape being grazed when a
cart is passing.  At No. 77 I found the place of business of Mr. Bennoch,
who came to see me at Rock Ferry with Mr. Jerdan, not long after my
arrival in England.  I found him in his office; but he did not at first
recognize me, so much stouter have I grown during my residence in
England,--a new man, as he says.  Mr. Bennoch is a kindly, frank, very
good man, and was bounteous in his plans for making my time pass
pleasantly.  We talked of ------, from whom he has just received a
letter, and who says he will fight for England in case of a war.  I let
Bennoch know that I, at least, should take the other side.

This is an atom: 
After arranging to go to Greenwich Fair, and afterwards to dine with
Bennoch, I left him and went to Mr. ------'s office, and afterwards
strayed forth again, and crossed London Bridge.  Thence I rambled rather
drearily along through several shabby and uninteresting streets on the
other side of the Thames; and the dull streets in London are really the
dullest and most disheartening in the world.  By and by I found my way to
Southwark Bridge, and so crossed to Upper Thames Street, which was
likewise very stupid, though I believe Clenman's paternal house in
"Little Dorrit" stands thereabouts. . . . Next, I got into Ludgate
Hill, near St. Paul's, and being quite foot-weary, I took a Paddington
omnibus, and rode up into Regent Street, whence I came home.

This is an atom: 
March 24th.--Yesterday being a clear day for England, we determined upon
an expedition to Hampton Court; so walked out betimes towards the
Waterloo station; but first crossed the Thames by Westminster Bridge, and
went to Lambeth Palace.  It stands immediately on the bank of the river,
not far above the bridge.  We merely walked round it, and saw only an old
stone tower or two, partially renewed with brick, and a high connecting
wall, within which appeared gables and other portions of the palace, all
of an ancient plan and venerable aspect, though evidently much patched up
and restored in the course of the many ages since its foundation.  There
is likewise a church, part of which looks old, connected with the palace.
The streets surrounding it have many gabled houses, and a general look of
antiquity, more than some other parts of London.

This is an atom: 
We then walked to the Waterloo station, on the same side of the river;
and at twenty minutes past one took the rail for Hampton Court, distant
some twelve or fifteen miles.  On arriving at the terminus, we beheld
Hampton Palace, on the other side of the Thames,--an extensive structure,
with a front of red brick, long and comparatively low, with the great
Hall which Wolsey built rising high above the rest.  We crossed the river
(which is here but a narrow stream) by a stone bridge.  The entrance to
the palace is about half a quarter of a mile from the railway, through
arched gates, which give a long perspective into the several quadrangles.
These quadrangles, one beyond another, are paved with stone, and
surrounded by the brick walls of the palace, the many windows of which
look in upon them.  Soldiers were standing sentinel at the exterior
gateways, and at the various doors of the palace; but they admitted
everybody without question and without fee.  Policemen, or other
attendants, were in most of the rooms, but interfered with no one; so
that, in this respect, it was one of the pleasantest places to visit that
I have found in England.  A good many people, of all classes, were
strolling through the apartments.

This is an atom: 
We first went into Wolsey's great Hall, up a most spacious staircase, the
walls and ceiling of which were covered with an allegorical fresco by
Verrio, wonderfully bright and well preserved; and without caring about
the design or execution, I greatly liked the brilliancy of the colors.
The great Hall is a most noble and beautiful room, above a hundred feet
long and sixty high and broad.  Most of the windows are of stained or
painted glass, with elaborate designs, whether modern or ancient I know
not, but certainly brilliant in effect.  The walls, from the floor to
perhaps half their height, are covered with antique tapestry, which,
though a good deal faded, still retains color enough to be a very
effective adornment, and to give an idea of how rich a mode of decking a
noble apartment this must have been.  The subjects represented were from
Scripture, and the figures seemed colossal.  On looking closely at this
tapestry, you could see that it was thickly interwoven with threads of
gold, still glistening.  The windows, except one or two that are long, do
not descend below the top of this tapestry, and are therefore twenty or
thirty feet above the floor; and this manner of lighting a great room
seems to add much to the impressiveness of the enclosed space.  The roof
is very magnificent, of carved oak, intricately and elaborately arched,
and still as perfect to all appearance as when it was first made.  There
are banners, so fresh in their hues, and so untattered, that I think they
must be modern, suspended along beneath the cornice of the hall, and
exhibiting Wolsey's arms and badges.  On the whole, this is a perfect
sight, in its way.

This is an atom: 
Next to the hall there is a withdrawing-room, more than seventy feet
long, and twenty-five feet high.  The walls of this apartment, too, are
covered with ancient tapestry, of allegorical design, but more faded than
that of the hall.  There is also a stained-glass window; and a marble
statue of Venus on a couch, very lean and not very beautiful; and some
cartoons of Carlo Cignani, which have left no impression on  my memory;
likewise, a large model of a splendid palace of some East Indian nabob.

This is an atom: 
I am not sure, after all, that Verrio's frescoed grand staircase was not
in another part of the palace; for I remember that we went from it
through an immensely long suite of apartments, beginning with the
Guard-chamber.  All these rooms are wainscoted with oak, which looks new,
being, I believe, of the date of King William's reign.  Over many of the
doorways, or around the panels, there are carvings in wood by Gibbons,
representing wreaths of flowers, fruit, and foliage, the most perfectly
beautiful that can be conceived; and the wood being of a light hue
(lime-wood, I believe), it has a fine effect on the dark oak panelling.
The apartments open one beyond another, in long, long, long succession,--
rooms of state, and kings' and queens' bedchambers, and royal closets
bigger than ordinary drawing-rooms, so that the whole suite must be half
a mile, or it may be a mile, in extent.  From the windows you get views
of the palace-grounds, broad and stately walks, and groves of trees, and
lawns, and fountains, and the Thames and adjacent country beyond.  The
walls of all these rooms are absolutely covered with pictures, including
works of all the great masters, which would require long study before a
new eye could enjoy them; and, seeing so many of them at once, and having
such a nothing of time to look at them all, I did not even try to see any
merit in them.  Vandyke's picture of Charles I., on a white horse beneath
an arched gateway, made more impression on me than any other, and as I
recall it now, it seems as if I could see the king's noble, melancholy
face, and armed form, remembered not in picture, but in reality.  All Sir
Peter Lely's lewd women, and Kneller's too, were in these rooms; and the
jolly old stupidity of George III. and his family, many times repeated;
and pictures by Titian, Rubens, and other famous hands, intermixed with
many by West, which provokingly drew the eye away from their betters.  It
seems to me that a picture, of all other things, should be by itself;
whereas people always congregate them in galleries.  To endeavor really
to see them, so arranged, is like trying to read a hundred poems at
once,--a most absurd attempt.  Of all these pictures, I hardly recollect
any so well as a ridiculous old travesty of the Resurrection and Last
Judgment, where the dead people are represented as coming to life at the
sound of the trumpet,--the flesh re-establishing itself on the bones, one
man picking up his skull, and putting it on his shoulders,--and all
appearing greatly startled, only half awake, and at a loss what to do
next.  Some devils are dragging away the damned by the heels and on
sledges, and above sits the Redeemer and some angelic and sainted people,
looking complacently down upon the scene!

This is an atom: 
We saw, in one of the rooms, the funeral canopy beneath which the Duke of
Wellington lay in state,--very gorgeous, of black velvet embroidered with
silver and adorned with escutcheons; also, the state bed of Queen Anne,
broad, and of comfortable appearance, though it was a queen's,--the
materials of the curtains, quilt, and furniture, red velvet, still
brilliant in hue; also King William's bed and his queen Mary's, with
enormously tall posts, and a good deal the worse for time and wear.

This is an atom: 
The last apartment we entered was the gallery containing Raphael's
cartoons, which I shall not pretend to admire nor to understand.  I can
conceive, indeed, that there is a great deal of expression in them, and
very probably they may, in every respect, deserve all their fame; but on
this point I can give no testimony.  To my perception they were a series
of very much faded pictures, dimly seen (for this part of the palace was
now in shadow), and representing figures neither graceful nor beautiful,
nor, as far as I could discern, particularly grand.  But I came to them
with a wearied mind and eye; and also I had a previous distaste to them
through the medium of engravings.

This is an atom: 
But what a noble palace, nobly enriched, is this Hampton Court!  The
English government does well to keep it up, and to admit the people
freely into it, for it is impossible for even a Republican not to feel
something like awe--at least a profound respect--for all this state, and
for the institutions which are here represented, the sovereigns whose
moral magnificence demands such a residence; and its permanence, too,
enduring from age to age, and each royal generation adding new splendors
to those accumulated by their predecessors.  If one views the matter in
another way, to be sure, we may feel indignant that such dolt-heads,
rowdies, and every way mean people, as many of the English sovereigns
have been, should inhabit these stately halls, contrasting its splendors
with their littleness; but, on the whole, I readily consented within
myself to be impressed for a moment with the feeling that royalty has its
glorious side.  By no possibility can we ever have such a place in
America.

This is an atom: 
Leaving Hampton Court at about four o'clock, we walked through Bushy
Park,--a beautiful tract of ground, well wooded with fine old trees,
green with moss, all up their twisted trunks,--through several villages,
Twickenham among the rest, to Richmond.  Before entering Twickenham, we
passed a lath-and-plaster castellated edifice, much time-worn, and with
the plaster peeling off from the laths, which I fancied might be Horace
Walpole's toy-castle.  Not that it really could have been; but it was
like the image, wretchedly mean and shabby, which one forms of such a
place, in its decay.  From Hampton Court to the Star and Garter, on
Richmond Hill, is about six miles.  After glancing cursorily at the
prospect, which is famous, and doubtless very extensive and beautiful if
the English mistiness would only let it be seen, we took a good dinner in
the large and handsome coffee-room of the hotel, and then wended our way
to the rail-station, and reached home between eight and nine o'clock.  We
must have walked not far from fifteen miles in the course of the day.

This is an atom: 
March 25th.--Yesterday, at one o'clock, I called by appointment on Mr.
Bennoch, and lunched with him and his partners and clerks.  This lunch
seems to be a legitimate continuation of the old London custom of the
master living at the same table with his apprentices.  The meal was a
dinner for the latter class.  The table was set in an upper room of the
establishment; and the dinner was a large joint of roast mutton, to which
ten people sat down, including a German silk-merchant as a guest besides
myself.  Mr. Bennoch was at the head of the table, and one of his
partners at the foot.  For the apprentices there was porter to drink, and
for the partners and guests some sparkling Moselle, and we had a
sufficient dinner with agreeable conversation.  Bennoch said that
G. G------ used to be very fond of these lunches while in England.

This is an atom: 
After lunch, Mr. Bennoch took me round the establishment, which is quite
extensive, occupying, I think, two or three adjacent houses, and
requiring more.  He showed me innumerable packages of ribbons, and other
silk manufactures, and all sorts of silks, from the raw thread to the
finest fabrics.  He then offered to show me some of the curiosities of
old London, and took me first to Barber-Surgeons' Hall, in Monkwell
Street.  It was at this place that the first anatomical studies were
instituted in England.  At the time of its foundation, the Barbers and
Surgeons were one company; but the latter, I believe, are now the
exclusive possessors of the Hall.  The edifice was built by Inigo Jones,
and the principal room is a fine one, with finely carved wood-work on the
ceiling and walls.  There is a skylight in the roof, letting down a
sufficient radiance on the long table beneath, where, no doubt, dead
people have been dissected, and where, for many generations, it has been
the custom of the society to hold its stated feasts.  In this room hangs
the most valuable picture by Holbein now in existence, representing the
company of Barber-Surgeons kneeling before Henry VIII., and receiving
their charter from his hands.  The picture is about six feet square.  The
king is dressed in scarlet, and quite fulfils one's idea of his aspect.
The Barber-Surgeons, all portraits, are an assemblage of grave-looking
personages, in dark costumes.  The company has refused five thousand
pounds for this unique picture; and the keeper of the Hall told me that
Sir Robert Peel had offered a thousand pounds for liberty to take out
only one of the heads, that of a person named Pen, he conditioning to
have a perfect fac-simile painted in.  I did not see any merit in this
head over the others.

This is an atom: 
Beside this great picture hung a most exquisite portrait by Vandyke; an
elderly, bearded man, of noble and refined countenance, in a rich, grave
dress.  There are many other pictures of distinguished men of the
company, in long past times, and of some of the kings and great people of
England, all darkened with age, and producing a rich and sombre effect,
in this stately old hall.  Nothing is more curious in London than these
ancient localities and customs of the City Companies,--each trade and
profession having its own hall, and its own institutions.  The keeper
next showed us the plate which is used at the banquets.

This is an atom: 
I should like to be present at one of these feasts.  I saw also an old
vellum manuscript, in black-letter, which appeared to be a record of the
proceedings of the company; and at the end there were many pages ruled
for further entries, but none had been made in the volume for the last
three or four hundred years.

This is an atom: 
I think it was in the neighborhood of Barber-Surgeons' Hall, which stands
amid an intricacy of old streets, where I should never have thought of
going, that I saw a row of ancient almshouses, of Elizabethan structure.
They looked wofully dilapidated.  In front of one of them was an
inscription, setting forth that some worthy alderman had founded this
establishment for the support of six poor men; and these six, or their
successors, are still supported, but no larger number, although the value
of the property left for that purpose would now suffice for a much larger
number.

This is an atom: 
Then Mr. Bennoch took me to Cripplegate, and, entering the door of a
house, which proved to be a sexton's residence, we passed by a side
entrance into the church-porch of St. Giles, of which the sexton's house
seems to be an indivisible contiguity.  This is a very ancient church,
that escaped the great fire of London.  The galleries are supported by
arches, the pillars of which are cased high upwards with oak; but all
this oaken work and the oaken pews are comparatively modern, though so
solid and dark that they agree well enough with the general effect of the
church.  Proceeding to the high altar, we found it surrounded with many
very curious old monuments and memorials, some in carved oak, some in
marble; grim old worthies, mostly in the costume of Queen Elizabeth's
time.  Here was the bust of Speed, the historian; here was the monument
of Fox, author of The Book of Martyrs.  High up on the wall, beside the
altar, there was a black wooden coffin, and a lady sitting upright within
it, with her hands clasped in prayer, it being her awakening moment at
the Resurrection.  Thence we passed down the centre aisle, and about
midway we stopped before a marble bust, fixed against one of the pillars.
And this was the bust of Milton!  Yes, and Milton's bones lay beneath our
feet; for he was buried under the pew over the door of which I was
leaning.  The bust, I believe, is the original of the one in Westminster
Abbey.

This is an atom: 
Treading over the tombstones of the old citizens of London, both in the
aisles and the porch, and within doors and without, we went into the
churchyard, one side of which is fenced in by a portion of London Wall,
very solid, and still high, though the accumulation of human dust has
covered much of its base.  This is the most considerable portion now
remaining of the ancient wall of London.  The sexton now asked us to go
into the tower of the church, that he might show us the oldest part of
the structure, and we did so, and, looking down from the organ gallery, I
saw a woman sitting alone in the church, waiting for the rector, whose
ghostly consolation, I suppose, she needed.

This is an atom: 
This old church-tower was formerly lighted by three large windows,--one
of them of very great size; but the thrifty church-wardens of a
generation or two ago had built them up with brick, to the great
disfigurement of the church.  The sexton called my attention to the
organ-pipe, which is of sufficient size, I believe, to admit three men.

This is an atom: 
From Cripplegate we went to Milton Street (as it is now called), through
which we walked for a very excellent reason; for this is the veritable
Grub Street, where my literary kindred of former times used to
congregate.  It is still a shabby-looking street, with old-fashioned
houses, and inhabited chiefly by people of the poorer classes, though not
by authors.  Next we went to Old Broad Street, and, being joined by
Mr. B------, we set off for London Bridge, turning out of our direct
course to see London stone in Watling Street.  This famous stone appears
now to be built into the wall of St. Swithin's Church, and is so encased
that you can only see and touch the top of it through a circular hole.
There are one or two long cuts or indentations in the top, which are said
to have been made by Jack Cade's sword when he struck it against the
stone.  If so, his sword was of a redoubtable temper.  Judging by what I
saw, London stone was a rudely shaped and unhewn post.

This is an atom: 
At the London Bridge station, we took the rail for Greenwich, and, it
being only about five miles off, we were not long in reaching the town.
It was Easter Monday; and during the first three days of Easter, from
time immemorial, a fair has been held at Greenwich, and this was what we
had come to see.

This is an atom: 
[This fair is described in Our Old Home, in "A Loudon Suburb."]

This is an atom: 
Reaching Mr. Bennoch's house, we found it a pretty and comfortable one,
and adorned with many works of art; for he seems to be a patron of art
and literature, and a warm-hearted man, of active benevolence and vivid
sympathies in many directions.  His face shows this.  I have never seen
eyes of a warmer glow than his.  On the walls of one room there were a
good many sketches by Haydon, and several artists' proofs of fine
engravings, presented by persons to whom he had been kind.  In the
drawing-room there was a marble bust of Mrs. ------, and one, I think, of
himself, and one of the Queen, which Mr. Bennoch said was very good, and
it is unlike any other I have seen.  It is intended as a gift, from a
number of subscribers, to Miss Nightingale.  Likewise a crayon sketch of
------, looking rather morbid and unwholesome, as the poor lady really
is.  Also, a small picture of Mr. Bennoch in a military dress, as an
officer, probably of city-horse.  By and by came in a young gentleman,
son of Haydon, the painter of high art, and one or two ladies staying in
the house, and anon Mrs. ------.  And so we went in to dinner.

This is an atom: 
Bennoch is an admirable host, and warms his guests like a household fire
by the influence of his kindly face and glowing eyes, and by such
hospitable demeanor as best suits this aspect.  After the cloth was
removed, came in Mr. Newton Crosland, a young man who once called on me
in Liverpool,--the husband of a literary lady, formerly Camilla Toulmin.
The lady herself was coming to spend the evening.  The husband (and I
presume the wife) is a decided believer in spiritual manifestations.  We
talked of politics and spiritualism and literature; and before we rose
from table, Mr. Bennoch drank the health of the ladies, and especially of
Mrs. ------, in terms very kind towards her and me.  I responded in her
behalf as well as I could, and left it to Mr. Bowman, as a bachelor, to
respond for the ladies generally,--which he did briefly, toasting
Mrs. B------.

This is an atom: 
We had heard the sound of the piano in the drawing-room for some time,
and now adjourning thither, I had the pleasure to be introduced to Mrs.
Newton Crosland,--a rather tall, thin, pale, and lady-like person,
looking, I thought, of a sensitive character.  She expressed in a low
tone and quiet way great delight at seeing my distinguished self! for she
is a vast admirer of The Scarlet Letter, and especially of the character
of Hester; indeed, I remember seeing a most favorable criticism of the
book from her pen, in one of the London magazines. . . .

This is an atom: 
At eleven o'clock Mrs. Crosland entered the tiniest pony-carriage, and
set forth for her own residence, with a lad walking at the pony's head,
and carrying a lantern. . . .

This is an atom: 
March 26th.--Yesterday was not a very eventful day.  After writing in my
journal I went out at twelve, and visited, for the first time, the
National Gallery.  It is of no use for me to criticise pictures, or to
try to describe them, but I have an idea that I might acquire a taste,
with a little attention to the subject, for I find I already begin to
prefer some pictures to others.  This is encouraging.  Of those that I
saw yesterday, I think I liked several by Murillo best.  There were a
great many people in the gallery, almost entirely of the middle, with a
few of the lower classes; and I should think that the effect of the
exhibition must at least tend towards refinement.  Nevertheless, the only
emotion that I saw displayed was in broad grins on the faces of a man and
two women, at sight of a small picture of Venus, with a Satyr peeping at
her with an expression of gross animal delight and merriment.  Without
being aware of it, this man and the two women were of that same Satyr
breed.

This is an atom: 
If I lived in London, I would endeavor to educate myself in this and
other galleries of art; but as the case stands, it would be of no use.  I
saw two of Turner's landscapes; but did not see so much beauty in them as
in some of Claude's.  A view of the grand canal in Venice, by Canaletto,
seemed to me wonderful,--absolutely perfect,--a better reality, for I
could see the water of the canal moving and dimpling; and the palaces and
buildings on each side were quite as good in their way.

This is an atom: 
Leaving the gallery, I walked down into the city, and passed through
Smithfield, where I glanced at St. Bartholomew's Hospital. . . . Then I
went into St. Paul's, and walked all round the great cathedral, looking,
I believe, at every monument on the floor.  There is certainly nothing
very wonderful in any of them, and I do wish it would not so generally
happen that English warriors go into battle almost nude; at least, we
must suppose so, from their invariably receiving their death-wounds in
that condition.  I will not believe that a sculptor or a painter is a man
of genius unless he can wake the nobleness of his subject, illuminate and
transfigure any given pattern of coat and breeches.  Nevertheless, I
never go into St. Paul's without being impressed anew with the grandeur
of the edifice, and the general effect of these same groups of statuary
ranged in their niches and at the bases of the pillars as adornments of
the cathedral.

This is an atom: 
Coming homeward, I went into the enclosure of the Temple, and near the
entrance saw "Dr. Johnson's staircase" printed over a doorway; so I not
only looked in, but went up the first flight, of some broad, well-worn
stairs, passing my hand over a heavy, ancient, broken balustrade, on
which, no doubt, Johnson's hand had often rested.  It was here that
Boswell used to visit him, in their early acquaintance.  Before my lunch,
I had gone into Bolt Court, where he died.

This is an atom: 
This morning there have been letters from Mr. Wilding, enclosing an
invitation to me to be one of the stewards of the anniversary dinner of
the Literary Fund.

This is an atom: 
No, I thank you, gentlemen!

This is an atom: 
March 27th.--Yesterday I went out at about twelve, and visited the
British Museum; an exceedingly tiresome affair.  It quite crushes a
person to see so much at once, and I wandered from hall to hall with a
weary and heavy heart, wishing (Heaven forgive me!) that the Elgin
marbles and the frieze of the Parthenon were all burnt into lime,
and that the granite Egyptian statues were hewn and squared into
building-stones, and that the mummies had all turned to dust two thousand
years ago; and, in fine, that all the material relics of so many
successive ages had disappeared with the generations that produced them.
The present is burdened too much with the past.  We have not time, in our
earthly existence, to appreciate what is warm with life, and immediately
around us; yet we heap up these old shells, out of which human life has
long emerged, casting them off forever.  I do not see how future ages are
to stagger onward under all this dead weight, with the additions that
will be continually made to it.

This is an atom: 
After leaving the Museum, I went to see Bennoch, and arrange with him our
expedition of to-day; and he read me a letter from Topper, very earnestly
inviting me to come and spend a night or two with him.  Then I wandered
about the city, and was lost in the vicinity of Holborn; so that for a
long while I was under a spell of bewilderment, and kept returning, in
the strangest way, to the same point in Lincoln's Inn Fields. . . .

This is an atom: 
Mr. Bowman and I went to the Princess's Theatre in the evening.  Charles
Kean performed in Louis XI. very well indeed,--a thoughtful and highly
skilled actor,--much improved since I saw him, many years ago, in
America.

This is an atom: 
ALDERSHOTT CAMP.

This is an atom: 
April 1st.--After my last date on Thursday, I visited the National
Gallery.  At three o'clock, having packed a travelling-bag, I went to
Bennoch's office, and lunched with him; and at about five we took the
rail from the Waterloo station for Aldershott Camp.  At Tamborough we
were cordially received by Lieutenant Shaw, of the North Cork Rifles, and
were escorted by him, in a fly, to his quarters.  The camp is a large
city, composed of numberless wooden barracks, arranged in regular
streets, on a wide, bleak heath, with an extensive and dreary prospect on
all sides.  Lieutenant Shaw assigned me one room in his hut, and Bennoch
another, and made us as comfortable as kind hospitality could; but the
huts are very small, and the rooms have no size at all; neither are they
air-tight, and the sharp wind whistles in at the crevices; and, on the
whole, of all discomfortable places, I am inclined to reckon Aldershott
Camp the most so.  I suppose the government has placed the camp on that
windy heath, and built such wretched huts, for the very purpose of
rendering life as little desirable as may be to the soldiers, so that
they should throw it away the more willingly.

This is an atom: 
At seven o'clock we dined at the regimental mess, with the officers of
the North Cork.  The mess-room is by far the most endurable place to be
found in camp.  The hut is large, and the mess-room is capable of
receiving between thirty and forty guests, besides the officers of the
regiment, when a great dinner-party is given.  As I saw it, the whole
space was divided into a dining-room and two anterooms by red curtains
drawn across; and the second anteroom seems to be a general rendezvous
for the officers, where they meet at all times, and talk, or look over
the newspapers and the army-register, which constitute the chief of their
reading.  The Colonel and Lieutenant-Colonel of the regiment received
Bennoch and me with great cordiality, as did all the other officers, and
we sat down to a splendid dinner.

This is an atom: 
All the officers of the regiment are Irishmen, and all of them, I
believe, men of fortune; and they do what they can towards alleviating
their hardships in camp by eating and drinking of the best that can be
obtained of all good things.  The table service and plate were as fine as
those in any nobleman's establishment; the dishes numerous and admirably
got up; and the wines delectable and genuine,--as they had need to be;
for there is a great consumption of them.  I liked these Irish officers
exceedingly;--not that it would be possible to live long among them
without finding existence a bore; for they have no thought, no
intellectual movement, no ideas, that I was aware of, beyond horses,
dogs, drill, garrisons, field-days, whist, wine, cigars, and all that
kind of thing; yet they were really gentlemen living on the best terms
with one another,--courteous, kind, most hospitable, with a rich Irish
humor, softened down by social refinements,--not too refined either, but
a most happy sort of behavior, as natural as that of children, and with a
safe freedom that made one feel entirely at my ease.  I think well of the
Irish gentlemen, for their sakes; and I believe I might fairly attribute
to Lieutenant-Colonel Stowell (next whom I sat) a higher and finer
cultivation than the above description indicates.  Indeed, many of them
may have been capable of much more intellectual intercourse than that of
the mess-table; but I suppose it would not have been in keeping with
their camp life, nor suggested by it.  Several of the elder officers were
men who had been long in the army; and the Colonel--a bluff, hearty old
soldier, with a profile like an eagle's head and beak--was a veteran of
the Peninsula, and had a medal on his breast with clasps for three famous
battles besides that of Waterloo.

This is an atom: 
The regimental band played during dinner, and the Lieutenant-Colonel
apologized to me for its not playing "Hail Columbia," the tune not coning
within their musical accomplishments.  It was no great matter, however;
for I should not have distinguished it from any other tune; but, to do me
what honor was possible, in the way of national airs, the band was
ordered to play a series of negro melodies, and I was entirely satisfied.
It is really funny that the "wood-notes wild" of those poor black slaves
should have been played in a foreign laud as an honorable compliment to
one of their white countrymen.

This is an atom: 
After dinner we played whist, and then had some broiled bones for supper,
and finally went home to our respective huts not much earlier than four
o'clock.  But I don't wonder these gentlemen sit up as long as they can
keep their eyes open; for never was there anything so utterly comfortless
as their camp-beds.  They are really worse than the bed of honor, no
wider, no softer, no warmer, and affording not nearly so sound sleep.
Indeed, I got hardly any sleep at all, and almost as soon as I did close
my eyes, the bugles sounded, and the drums beat reveille, and from that
moment the camp was all astir; so I pretty soon uprose, and went to the
mess-room for my breakfast, feeling wonderfully fresh and well,
considering what my night had been.

This is an atom: 
Long before this, however, this whole regiment, and all the other
regiments, marched off to take part in a general review, and Bennoch and
I followed, as soon as we had eaten a few mutton-chops.  It was a bright,
sunshiny day; but with a strong east-wind, as piercing and pitiless as
ever blew; and this wide, undulating plain of Aldershott seemed just the
place where the east-wind was at home.  Still, it acted, on the whole,
like an invigorating cordial; and whereas in pleasanter circumstances I
should have lain down, and gone to sleep, I now felt as if I could do
without sleep for a month.

This is an atom: 
In due time we found out the place of the North Cork Regiment in the
general battle-array, and were greeted as old comrades by the Colonel and
other officers.  Soon the soldiers (who, when we first reached them, were
strolling about, or standing at ease) were called into order; and anon we
saw a group of mounted officers riding along the lines, and among them a
gentleman in a civilian's round hat, and plain frock and trousers, riding
on a white horse.  This group of riders turned the front of the regiment,
and then passed along the rear, coming close to where we stood; and as
the plainly dressed gentleman rode by, he bent towards me, and I tried to
raise my hat, but did not succeed very well, because the fierce wind had
compelled me to jam it tightly upon my head.  The Duke of Cambridge (for
this was he) is a comely-looking gentlemanly man, of bluff English face,
with a great deal of brown beard about it.  Though a pretty tall man, he
appears, on  horseback, broad and round in proportion to his height.  I
looked at him with a certain sort of interest, and a feeling of kindness;
for one does feel kindly to whatever human being is anywise marked out
from the rest, unless it be by his disagreeable qualities.

This is an atom: 
The troops, from twelve to fifteen thousand, now fell into marching
order, and went to attack a wood, where we were to suppose the enemy to
be stationed.  The sham-fight seemed to me rather clumsily managed, and
without any striking incident or result.  The officers had prophesied,
the night before, that General K------, commanding in the camp, would
make a muddle of it; and probably he did.  After the review, the Duke of
Cambridge with his attendant officers took their station, and all the
regiments marched in front of him, saluting as they passed.  As each
colonel rode by, and as the banner of each regiment was lowered, the Duke
lifted his hat.

This is an atom: 
The most splendid effect of this parade was the gleam of the sun upon the
long line of bayonets,--the sheen of all that steel appearing like a
wavering fringe of light upon the dark masses of troops below.  It was
very fine.  But I was glad when all was done, and I could go back to the
mess-room, whither I carried an excellent appetite for luncheon.  After
this we walked about the camp,--looked at some model tents, inspected the
arrangements and modes of living in the huts of the privates; and thus
gained more and more adequate ideas of the vile uncomfortableness of a
military life.  Finally, I went to the anteroom and turned over the
regimental literature,--a peerage and baronetage,--an army and militia
register, a number of the Sporting Magazine, and one of the United
Service, while Bennoch took another walk.  Before dinner we both tried to
catch a little nap by way of compensation for last night's deficiencies;
but, for my part, the attempt was fruitless.

This is an atom: 
The dinner was as splendid and as agreeable as that of the evening
before; and I believe it was nearly two o'clock when Bennoch and I bade
farewell to our kind entertainers.  For my part I fraternized with these
military gentlemen in a way that augurs the very best things for the
future peace of the two countries.  They all expressed the warmest
sympathies towards America and it was easy to judge from their
conversation that there is no real friendliness on the part of the
military towards the French.  The old antipathy is just as strong as
ever,--stronger than ever, perhaps, on account of the comparatively more
brilliant success of the French in this Russian war.  So, with most
Christian sentiments of peace and brotherly love, we returned to our hut,
and lay down, each in his narrow bed.

This is an atom: 
Early in the morning the drums and bugles began the usual bedevilment;
and shortly after six I dressed, and we had breakfast at the mess-room,
shook hands with Lieutenant Shaw (our more especial host), and drove off
to the railway station at Ash.

This is an atom: 
I know not whether I have mentioned that the villages neighboring to the
camp have suffered terribly as regards morality from the vicinity of the
soldiers.  Quiet old English towns, that till within a little time ago
had kept their antique simplicity and innocence, have now no such thing
as female virtue in them, so far as the lower classes are concerned.
This is expressing the matter too strongly, no doubt; but there is too
much truth in it, nevertheless; and one of the officers remarked that
even ladies of respectability had grown much more free in manners and
conversation than at first.  I have heard observations similar to this
from a Nova-Scotian, in reference to the moral influence of soldiers when
stationed in the provinces.

This is an atom: 
WOOTON.

This is an atom: 
Wooton stands in a hollow, near the summit of one of the long swells that
here undulate over the face of the country.  There is a good deal of wood
behind it, as should be the case with the residence of the author of the
Sylva; but I believe few, if any, of these trees are known to have been
planted by John Evelyn, or even to have been coeval with his time.  The
house is of brick, partly ancient, and consists of a front and two
projecting wings, with a porch and entrance in the centre.  It has a
desolate, meagre aspect, and needs something to give it life and stir and
jollity.  The present proprietor is of the old Evelyn family, and is now
one of the two members of Parliament for Surrey; but he is a very shy and
retiring man, unmarried, sees little company, and seems either not to
know how to make himself comfortable or not to care about it.  A servant
told us that Mr. ------ had just gone out, but Tupper, who is apparently
on intimate terms with him, thought it best that we should go into the
house, while he went in search of the master.  So the servant ushered us
through a hall,--where were many family pictures by Lely, and, for aught
I know, by Vandyke, and by Kneller, and other famous painters,--up a
grand staircase, and into the library, the inner room of which contained
the ponderous volumes which John Evelyn used to read.  Nevertheless, it
was a room of most barren aspect, without a carpet on the floor, with
pine bookcases, with a common whitewashed ceiling, with no luxurious
study-chairs, and without a fire.  There was an open folio on the table,
and a sheet of manuscript that appeared to have been recently written.  I
took down a book from the shelves (a volume of annals, connected with
English history), and Tupper afterwards told us that this one single
volume, for its rarity, was worth either two or three hundred pounds.
Against one of the windows of this library there grows a magnolia-tree,
with a very large stem, and at least fifty years old.

This is an atom: 
Mrs. Tupper and I waited a good while, and then Bennoch and Tupper came
back, without having found Mr. ------.  Tupper wished very much to show
the prayer-book used by King Charles at his execution, and some curious
old manuscript volumes; but the servant said that his master always kept
these treasures locked up, and trusted the key to nobody.  We therefore
had to take our leave without seeing them; and I have not often entered a
house that one feels to be more forlorn than Wooton,--although we did
have a glimpse of a dining-room, with a table laid for three or four
guests, and looking quite brilliant with plate and glass and snowy
napery.  There was a fire, too, in this one room.  Mr. ------ is making
extensive alterations in the house, or has recently done so, and this is
perhaps one reason of its ungenial meagreness and lack of finish.

This is an atom: 
Before our departure from Wooton, Tupper had asked me to leave my card
for Mr. ------; but I had no mind to overstep any limit of formal
courtesy in dealing with an Englishman, and therefore declined.  Tupper,
however, on his own responsibility, wrote his name, Bennoch's, and mine
on a piece of paper, and told the servant to show them to Mr. ------.  We
soon had experience of the good effect of this; for we had scarcely got
back before somebody drove up to Tupper's door, and one of the girls,
looking out, exclaimed that there was Mr. ------ himself, and another
gentleman.  He had set out, the instant he heard of our call, to bring
the three precious volumes for me to see.  This surely was most kind; a
kindness which I should never have dreamed of expecting from a shy,
retiring man like Mr. ------.

This is an atom: 
So he and his friend were ushered into the dining-room, and introduced.
Mr. ------ is a young-looking man, dark, with a mustache, rather small,
and though he has the manners of a man who has seen the world, it
evidently requires an effort in him to speak to anybody; and I could see
his whole person slightly writhing itself, as it were, while he addressed
me.  This is strange in a man of his public position, member for the
county, necessarily mixed up with life in many forms, the possessor of
sixteen thousand pounds a year, and the representative of an ancient
name.  Nevertheless, I liked him, and felt as if I could become
intimately acquainted with him, if circumstances were favorable; but, at
a brief interview like this, it was hopeless to break through two great
reserves; so I talked more with his companion--a pleasant young man,
fresh from college, I should imagine--than with Mr. ------ himself.

This is an atom: 
The three books were really of very great interest.  One was an octavo
volume of manuscript in John Evelyn's own hand, the beginning of his
published diary, written as distinctly as print, in a small, clear
character.  It can be read just as easily as any printed book.  Another
was a Church of England prayer-book, which King Charles used on the
scaffold, and which was stained with his sacred blood, and underneath are
two or three lines in John Evelyn's hand, certifying this to be the very
book.  It is an octavo, or small folio, and seems to have been very
little used, scarcely opened, except in one spot; its leaves elsewhere
retaining their original freshness and elasticity.  It opens most readily
at the commencement of the common service; and there, on the left-hand
page, is a discoloration, of a yellowish or brownish hue, about two
thirds of an inch large, which, two hundred years ago and a little more,
was doubtless red.  For on that page had fallen a drop of King Charles's
blood.

This is an atom: 
The other volume was large, and contained a great many original letters,
written by the king during his troubles.  I had not time to examine them
with any minuteness, and remember only one document, which Mr. ------
pointed out, and which had a strange pathos and pitifulness in it.  It
was a sort of due-bill, promising to pay a small sum for beer, which had
been supplied to his Majesty, so soon as God should enable him, or the
distracted circumstances of his kingdom make it possible,--or some
touching and helpless expression of that kind.  Prince Hal seemed to
consider it an unworthy matter, that a great prince should think of "that
poor creature, small beer," at all; but that a great prince should not be
able to pay for it is far worse.

This is an atom: 
Mr. ------ expressed his regret that I was not staying longer in this
part of the country, as he would gladly have seen me at Wooten, and he
succeeded in saying something about my books; and I hope I partly
succeeded in showing him that I was very sensible of his kindness in
letting me see those relics.  I cannot say whether or no I expressed it
sufficiently.  It is better with such a man, or, indeed, with any man, to
say too little than too much; and, in fact, it would have been indecorous
in me to take too much of his kindness to my own share, Bennoch being
likewise in question.

This is an atom: 
We had a cup of coffee, and then took our leave; Tupper accompanying us
part way down the village street, and bidding us an affectionate
farewell.

This is an atom: 
BATTLE ABBEY.

This is an atom: 
Bennoch and I recommenced our travels, and, changing from one railway to
another, reached Tunbridge Wells at nine or ten in the evening. . . .
The next day was spent at Tunbridge Wells, which is famous for a
chalybeate spring, and is a watering-place of note, most healthily
situated on a high, breezy hill, with many pleasant walks in the
neighborhood. . . . From Tunbridge Wells we transported ourselves to
Battle,--the village in which is Battle Abbey.  It is a large village,
with many antique houses and some new ones; and in its principal street,
on one side, with a wide, green space before it, you see the gray,
embattled, outer wall, and great, square, battlemented entrance tower
(with a turret at each corner), of the ancient Abbey.  It is the perfect
reality of a Gothic battlement and gateway, just as solid and massive as
when it was first built, though hoary and venerable with the many
intervening centuries.  There are only two days in the week on which
visitors are allowed entrance, and this was not one of them.
Nevertheless, Bennoch was determined to get in, and he wished me to send
Lady Webster my card with his own; but this I utterly refused, for the
honor of America and for my own honor; because I will not do anything to
increase the reputation we already have as a very forward people.
Bennoch, however, called at a bookshop on the other side of the street,
near the gateway of the castle; and making friends, as he has a
marvellous tact in doing, with the bookseller, the latter offered to take
in his card to the housekeeper, and see if Lady Webster would not relax
her rule in our favor.  Meanwhile, we went into the old church of Battle,
which was built in Norman times, though subsequently to the Abbey.  As we
entered the church door, the bell rang for joy at the news of peace,
which had just been announced by the London papers.

This is an atom: 
The church has been whitewashed in modern times, and does not look so
venerable as it ought, with its arches and pillared aisles.  In the
chancel stands a marble tomb, heavy, rich, and elaborate, on the top of
which lie the broken-nosed statues of Sir Anthony Browne and his lady,
who were the Lord and Lady of Battle Abbey in Henry VIII.'s time.  The
knight is in armor, and the lady in stately garb, and (save for their
broken noses) they are in excellent preservation.  The pavement of the
chancel and aisles is all laid with tombstones, and on two or three of
these there were engraved brasses, representing knights in armor, and
churchmen, with inscriptions in Latin.  Some of them are very old.  On
the walls, too, there are various monuments, principally of dignitaries
connected with the Abbey.  Two hatchments, in honor of persons recently
dead, were likewise suspended in the chancel.  The best pew of the church
is, of course, that of the Webster family.  It is curtained round,
carpeted, furnished with chairs and footstools, and more resembles a
parlor than a pew; especially as there is a fireplace in one of the
pointed archways, which I suppose has been bricked up in order to form
it.  On the opposite side of the aisle is the pew of some other magnate,
containing a stove.  The rest of the parishioners have to keep themselves
warm with the fervor of their own piety.  I have forgotten what else was
interesting, except that we were shown a stone coffin, recently dug up,
in which was hollowed a place for the head of the corpse.

This is an atom: 
Returning to the bookshop, we found that Lady Webster had sent her
compliments, and would be very happy to have us see the Abbey.  How
thoroughly kind these English people can be when they like, and how often
they like to be so!

This is an atom: 
We lost no time in ringing the bell at the arched entrance, under the
great tower, and were admitted by an old woman who lives, I believe, in
the thickness of the wall.  She told us her room used to be the prison of
the Abbey, and under the great arch she pointed to a projecting beam,
where she said criminals used to be hanged.

This is an atom: 
At two of the intersecting points of the arches, which form the roof of
the gateway, were carved faces of stone, said to represent King Harold
and William the Conqueror.  The exterior wall, of which this tower is the
gateway, extends far along the village street, and encloses a very large
space, within which stands the mansion, quite secluded from unauthorized
visitors, or even from the sight of those without, unless it be at very
distant eyeshot.

This is an atom: 
We rang at the principal door of the edifice (it is under a deep arch, in
the Norman style, but of modern date), and a footman let its in, and then
delivered us over to a respectable old lady in black.  She was a
Frenchwoman by birth, but had been very long in the service of the
family, and spoke English almost without an accent; her French blood
being indicated only by her thin and withered aspect, and a greater
gentility of manner than would have been seen in an Englishwoman of
similar station.  She ushered us first into a grand and noble hall, the
arched and carved oaken roof of which ascended into the gable.  It was
nearly sixty feet long, and its height equal to its length,--as stately a
hall, I should imagine, as is anywhere to be found in a private mansion.
It was lighted, at one end, by a great window, beneath which, occupying
the whole breadth of the hall, hung a vast picture of the Battle of
Hastings; and whether a good picture or no, it was a rich adornment of
the hall.  The walls were wainscoted high upward with oak: they were
almost covered with noble pictures of ancestry, and of kings and great
men, and beautiful women; there were trophies of armor hung aloft; and
two armed figures, one in brass mail, the other in bright steel, stood on
a raised dais, underneath the great picture.  At the end of the hall,
opposite the picture, a third of the way up towards the roof, was a
gallery.  All these things that I have enumerated were in perfect
condition, without rust, untouched by decay or injury of any kind; but
yet they seemed to belong to a past age, and were mellowed, softened in
their splendor, a little dimmed with time,--toned down into a venerable
magnificence.  Of all domestic things that I have seen in England, it
satisfied me most.

This is an atom: 
Then the Frenchwoman showed us into various rooms and offices, most of
which were contrived out of the old abbey-cloisters, and the vaulted
cells and apartments in which the monks used to live.  If any house be
haunted, I should suppose this might be.  If any church-property bring a
curse with it, as people say, I do not see how the owners of Battle Abbey
can escape it, taking possession of and dwelling in these holy precincts,
as they have done, and laying their kitchen hearth with the stones of
overthrown altars.  The Abbey was first granted, I believe, to Sir
Anthony Browne, whom I saw asleep with his lady in the church.  It was
his first wife.  I wish it had been his second; for she was Surrey's
Geraldine.  The posterity of Sir Anthony kept the place till 1719, and
then sold it to the Websters, a family of Baronets, who are still the
owners and occupants.  The present proprietor is Sir Augustus Webster,
whose mother is the lady that so kindly let us into the Abbey.

This is an atom: 
Mr. Bennoch gave the nice old French lady half a crown, and we next went
round among the ruined portions of the Abbey, under the gardener's
guidance.  We saw two ivied towers, insulated from all other ruins; and
an old refectory, open to the sky, and a vaulted crypt, supported by
pillars; and we saw, too, the foundation and scanty remains of a chapel,
which had been long buried out of sight of man, and only dug up within
present memory,--about forty years ago.  There had always been a
tradition that this was the spot where Harold had planted his standard,
and where his body was found after the battle; and the discovery of the
ruined chapel confirmed the tradition.

This is an atom: 
I might have seen a great deal more, had there been time; and I have
forgotten much of what I did see; but it is an exceedingly interesting
place.  There is an avenue of old yew-trees, which meet above like a
cloistered arch; and this is called the Monks' Walk.  I rather think they
were ivy, though growing unsupported.

This is an atom: 
As we were retiring, the gardener suddenly stopped, as if he were
alarmed, and motioned to us to do the same, saying, "I believe it is my
lady!"  And so it was,--a tall and stately lady in black, trimming shrubs
in the garden.  She bowed to us very graciously,--we raised our hats, and
thus we met and parted without more ado.  As we went through the arch of
the entrance tower, Bennoch gave the old female warder a shilling, and
the gardener followed us to get half a crown.

This is an atom: 
HASTINGS.

This is an atom: 
We took a fly and driver from the principal hotel of Battle, and drove
off for Hastings, about seven miles distant.  Hastings is now a famous
watering and sea-bathing place, and seems to be well sheltered from the
winds, though open to the sea, which here stretches off towards France.
We climbed a high and steep hill, terraced round its base with streets of
modern lodging-houses, and crowned on its summit with the ruins of a
castle, the foundation of which was anterior to the Conquest.  This
castle has no wall towards the sea, the precipice being too high and
sheer to admit of attack on that side.  I have quite exhausted my
descriptive faculty for the present, so shall say nothing of this old
castle, which indeed (the remains being somewhat scanty and scraggling)
is chiefly picturesque and interesting from its bold position on such a
headlong hill.

This is an atom: 
Clambering down on another side from that of our ascent, we entered
the town of Hastings, which seems entirely modern, and made up of
lodging-houses, shops, hotels, parades, and all such makings up of
watering-places generally.  We took a delightful warm bath, washing off
all weariness and naughtiness, and coming out new men.  Then we walked to
St. Leonard's,--a part of Hastings, I believe, but a mile or two from the
castle, and there called at the lodgings of two friends of Bennoch.

This is an atom: 
These were Mr. Martin, the author of Bon Gaultier's ballads, and his
wife, the celebrated actress, Helen Faucett.  Mr. Martin is a barrister,
a gentleman whose face and manners suited me at once; a simple, refined,
sincere, not too demonstrative person.  His wife, too, I liked; a tall,
dark, fine, and lady-like woman, with the simplest manners, that give no
trouble at all, and so must be perfect.  With these two persons I felt
myself, almost in a moment, on friendly terms, and in true accord, and so
I talked, I think, more than I have at any time since coming to London.

This is an atom: 
We took a pleasant lunch at their house; and then they walked with us to
the railway station, and there they took leave of Bennoch affectionately
and of me hardly less so; for, in truth, we had grown to be almost
friends in this very little while.  And as we rattled away, I said to
Bennoch earnestly, "What good people they are!"--and Bennoch smiled, as
if he had known perfectly well that I should think and say so.  And thus
we rushed onward to London; and I reached St. James's Place between nine
and ten o'clock, after a very interesting tour, the record of which I
wish I could have kept as we went along, writing each day's history
before another day's adventures began.

This is an atom: 
END OF VOL. I.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PLAGIARIZED ATOMS
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
***************************************************************************